


===============================
		FILE STARTS HERE
===============================
]

=====

=====

=====

=====

=====

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

======================

A baseness to write fair, and labored much

A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--

A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,

About her lank and all o'erteemed loins

About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard

about my heart. But it is no matter.

about of brains.

about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell

About the world have times twelve thirties been

a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,

A broken voice, and his whole function suiting

A brother's murder. Pray can I not,

Absent thee from felicity awhile

Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds

A Captain in Fortinbras's army

accent and good discretion.

According to the phrase or the addition

A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,

ache to think on 't.

A combination and a form indeed

a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.

A couch for luxury and damned incest.

A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

ACT 1

ACT 4

ACT 2

ACT 5

ACT 3

Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,

A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,

A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?

Addicted so and so." And there put on him

Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]

Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;

A double blessing is a double grace.

A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak

A face without a heart?

A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,

affair.

Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl

affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.

Affront Ophelia.

[A flourish for the Players.]

[A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]

After the Danish sword, and thy free awe

After the thing it loves.

afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common

Against the which a moiety competent

Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven

Against yourself. I know you are no truant.

a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'

agreeing,

A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,

Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!

a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.

A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,

Alack and fie for shame,

Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?

Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?

A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,

A little month, or ere those shoes were old

A little more than kin and less than kind.

all after!

ALL  Armed, my lord.

all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.

[All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]

[All but Hamlet exit.]

[All but Hamlet exit.]

[All but Hamlet exit.]

all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.

[All but the King exit.]

All flaxen was his poll.

All from her father's death, and now behold!

ALL  Gentlemen!

All given to mine ear.

all "impawned," as you call it?

All in the morning betime,

All may be well.	[He kneels.]

ALL  My lord, from head to foot.

All my smooth body.

ALL  No, let's come in!

ALL  Our duty to your Honor.

All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,

ALL  Treason, treason!

ALL  We do, my lord.

ALL  We will, we will.

Almost to jelly with the act of fear,

A Lord

A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards

[A march afar off and shot within.]

Ambassadors to Denmark from England

AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,

A minist'ring angel shall my sister be

am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]

Among a mineral of metals base,

A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.

An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.

an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the

ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and

And, after, we will both our judgments join

And all we mourn for.

And a man's life's no more than to say "one."

And am most sensibly in grief for it,

And a most instant tetter barked about,

And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,

And, as I think, they have already order

And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:

And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,

And, as the world were now but to begin,

And, as you said (and wisely was it said),

And, at our more considered time, we'll read,

And at the sound it shrunk in haste away

And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?

And bear it to the chapel.

And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,

And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,

And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet

And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.

And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;

And both neglect. What if this cursed hand

And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven

And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

And break your own neck down.

And breath of life, I have no life to breathe

And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

And, but that great command o'ersways the order,

And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--

And call it accident.

And call the noblest to the audience.

And can say nothing--no, not for a king

And can you by no drift of conference

And carriage of the article designed,

And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,

And convey is assistant, do not sleep,

And could of men distinguish, her election

And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee

And curd, like eager droppings into milk,

And do not spread the compost on the weeds

And do such bitter business as the day

And do 't the speedier that you may direct me

And draw you into madness? Think of it.

And drive his purpose into these delights.

and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he

And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed

And dupped the chamber door,

And each particular hair to stand an end,

And either ... the devil or throw him out

And end his being. That done, he lets me go,

And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught

And enterprises of great pitch and moment

And even the like precurse of feared events,

And ever three parts coward), I do not know

And fall a-cursing like a very drab,

And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.

And foreign mart for implements of war,

And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,

And for my means, I'll husband them so well

And for my soul, what can it do to that,

And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.

And for the day confined to fast in fires

And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish

And for your rapier most especial,

And from her fair and unpolluted flesh

And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.

And from his mouth whose voice will draw on

And gather by him, as he is behaved,

And gave you such a masterly report

And gem of all the nation.

And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.

And hath abatements and delays as many

And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,

And hath shipped me into the land,

And hears it roar beneath.

And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties

And here give up ourselves in the full bent

And he, repelled (a short tale to make),

And he to England shall along with you.

And his commission to employ those soldiers,

and his load too.

And his sandal shoon.

And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,

And hit the woundless air. O, come away!

And how, and who, what means, and where they

And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.

And hurt my brother.

And I a maid at your window,

And I am sick at heart.

And I believe it is a fetch of wit.

And I beseech you instantly to visit

And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose

And I do think, or else this brain of mine

And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw

And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear

And in a postscript here, he says "alone."

And in his grave rained many a tear.

"And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.

And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?

And in the cup an union shall he throw,

And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,

And in the porches of my ears did pour

And in this brainish apprehension kills

And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain

And, in this upshot, purposes mistook

And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,

And I the matter will reword, which madness

And it must follow, as the night the day,

And I with them the third night kept the watch,

And keep you in the rear of your affection,

And lay your hands again upon my sword.

And leads the will to desperate undertakings

And let all sleep, while to my shame I see

And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses

And let him know so.

And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world

And let me wring your heart; for so I shall

And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,

And let them know both what we mean to do

And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.

And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

And let us once again assail your ears,

and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.

And, like a man to double business bound,

And, like a neutral to his will and matter,

And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,

And live the purer with the other half!

and Lords exit.]

And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,

And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,

And makes as healthful music. It is not madness

And makes each petty arture in this body

And makes us rather bear those ills we have

And many suchlike ases of great charge,

And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,

And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!

And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame

And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,

And more above, hath his solicitings,

and more strange return. Hamlet.

And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,

and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?

And my imaginations are as foul

And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:

And never come mischance between us twain.

And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall

And not have strewed thy grave.

And nothing is at a like goodness still;

And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]

And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?

And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch

And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'

And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself

And our affairs from England come too late.

And our vain blows malicious mockery.

and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.

And passion in the gods.

And pious action we do sugar o'er

And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,

And praised be rashness for it; let us know,

and presently.

And prey on garbage.

And prologue to the omen coming on,

And put it in his pocket--

And reason panders will.

And recks not his own rede.

And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.

And set a double varnish on the fame

And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows

And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,

And, sister, as the winds give benefit

And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,

And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:

And so have I a noble father lost,

And so he goes to heaven,

And so, without more circumstance at all,

And spur my dull revenge. What is a man

And stand a comma 'tween their amities,

And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.

And sure I am two men there is not living

And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,

And tell you what I know.

And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands

And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared

And that his soul may be as damned and black

And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--

And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality

And that in way of caution), I must tell you

And that I see, in passages of proof,

And that our drift look through our bad

And that shall lend a kind of easiness

And that your Grace hath screened and stood

and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]

And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,

And then it started like a guilty thing

And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,

And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,

and then, you know,

And there assume some other horrible form

And there did seem in him a kind of joy

And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.

And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet

And therefore must his choice be circumscribed

And there I see such black and grained spots

and there is much music, excellent voice, in this

And these few precepts in thy memory

And they can well on horseback, but this gallant

And they in France of the best rank and station

And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.

And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.

And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen

And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,

And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,

And thrice his head thus waving up and down,

And thus awhile the fit will work on him.

And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,

And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,

And thus the native hue of resolution

And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--

And thy commandment all alone shall live

And to such wondrous doing brought his horse

And to the last bended their light on me.

And to the manner born, it is a custom

And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge

And vanished from our sight.

And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,

And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment

And wants not buzzers to infect his ear

And we beseech you, bend you to remain

And we cast away moan.

And we did think it writ down in our duty

And we shall jointly labor with your soul

And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--

And what's in prayer but this twofold force,

And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,

And what so poor a man as Hamlet is

And what's untimely done. ...

And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,

And, when you are desirous to be blest,

And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.

And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,

And who in want a hollow friend doth try

And why such daily cast of brazen cannon

And will he not come again?

And will he not come again?

And will not let belief take hold of him

And will not wrong it.

And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--

and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to

And with a larger tether may he walk

And with a look so piteous in purport

And with a sudden vigor it doth posset

And, with his head over his shoulder turned,

And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,

And with no less nobility of love

And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect

And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken

And with them words of so sweet breath composed

And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?

And women's fear and love hold quantity,

And (would it were not so) you are my mother.

And yet it is almost against my conscience.

And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with

And you must needs have heard, how I am punished

And you must put me in your heart for friend,

And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,

And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.

And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

An earnest conjuration from the King,

An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,

Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!

An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.

[A noise within.]

[A noise within.]

[A noise within:] "Let her come in!"

Anon, as patient as the female dove

Answer, and think upon this business.

An thou hadst not come to my bed."

Antiquity forgot, custom not known,

An understanding simple and unschooled.

ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,

A pickax and a spade, a spade,

Appears before them and with solemn march

A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.

Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid

Are here arrived, give order that these bodies

Are joyfully returned.

Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,

Are of a most select and generous chief in that.

are spent.

are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?

A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow

Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,

Armed, say you?

Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,

Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,

A royal knavery--an exact command,

article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness

Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.

art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O

A sable silvered.

As any the most vulgar thing to sense,

As are companions noted and most known

A savageness in unreclaimed blood,

As by lot, God wot

As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,

As checking at his voyage, and that he means

As day does to your eye.

As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?

As did that one, and that, in my regard,

A second time I kill my husband dead

As e'er my conversation coped withal.

As England was his faithful tributary,

A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark

As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed

As fits a king's remembrance.

As from the body of contraction plucks

As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured

As harbingers preceding still the fates

As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.

As he in his particular act and place

As he is very potent with such spirits,

As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.

As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.

(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),

As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder

[Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will

[Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),

As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.

As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--

As if he had been loosed out of hell

As if I had never been such.

As if increase of appetite had grown

As if it some impartment did desire

A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,

As infinite as man may undergo,

As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,

(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,

(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet

A sister driven into desp'rate terms,

As it behooves my daughter and your honor.

As it did seem to shatter all his bulk

(As it doth well appear unto our state)

As it hath used to do, that I have found

As it is common for the younger sort

As kill a king?

As kill a king and marry with his brother.

A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe

As level as the cannon to his blank

As love between them like the palm might flourish,

As low as to the fiends!

As made the things more rich. Their perfume

(As make your bouts more violent to that end)

As may dishonor him, take heed of that,

As meditation or the thoughts of love,

(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,

As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

As of a father; for let the world take note,

As of a man faithful and honorable.

As oft as any passions under heaven

As one incapable of her own distress

As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,

As peace should still her wheaten garland wear

assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--

assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the

As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,

Assume a virtue if you have it not.

assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--

A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!

A station like the herald Mercury

As the indifferent children of the earth.

As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;

As therein are set down.

As they fell out by time, by means, and place,

as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in

As thus: "I know his father and his friends

As to expend your time with us awhile

As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.

as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his

As to peace-parted souls.

As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,

As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,

As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,

(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will

As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,

As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we

As will not leave their tinct.

A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice

As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,

[A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers

At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--

At game, a-swearing, or about some act

At his head a grass-green turf,

At his heels a stone.

(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part

a thousand pound. Didst perceive?

At last, a little shaking of mine arm,

At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.

At least the whisper goes so: our last king,

at my beck than I have thoughts to put them

A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.

A truant disposition, good my lord.

At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.

Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers

attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your

Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone

at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]

A very ribbon in the cap of youth--

A very very--pajock.

A villain kills my father, and for that,

A violet in the youth of primy nature,

Awake the god of day, and at his warning,

Away, for everything is sealed and done

Away, I do beseech you both, away.

awhile but in the end accepts his love.]

a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's

a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I

A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,

Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!

Ay, madam, it is common.

Ay, so, good-bye to you.

Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,

Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,

Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat

back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in

bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager

Baked and impasted with the parching streets,

baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but

Barbary horses against six French swords, their

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.

BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?

BARNARDO  He.

BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.

BARNARDO  Last night of all,

BARNARDO  Long live the King!

BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.

BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?

BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.

BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,

BARNARDO  'Tis here.

BARNARDO  Well, good night.

BARNARDO  Who's there?

bastard,

Be all my sins remembered.

Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,

Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow

Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.

Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.

beating. And, when you are asked this question

beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and

Be buried quick with her, and so will I.

Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.

became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like

Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.

Been struck so to the soul that presently

Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,

Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;

Before my daughter told me), what might you,

Before my God, I might not this believe

Before you visit him, to make inquire

beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,

begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for

Behind the arras hearing something stir,

Behind the arras I'll convey myself

Being a thing immortal as itself?

Being nature's livery or fortune's star,

Being thus benetted round with villainies,

be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,

Believe so much in him that he is young,

bellowed that I have thought some of nature's

be one man picked out of ten thousand.

Be ruled. You shall not go.

Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.

Be something scanter of your maiden presence.

Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple

Bestow this place on us a little while.

Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,

Be thou assured, if words be made of breath

Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.

Be thy intents wicked or charitable,

between

between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves

Between the pass and fell incensed points

Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.

Be you content to lend your patience to us,

Black as his purpose, did the night resemble

Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me

Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?

blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,

blood

body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth

body is and go with us to the King.

book,

Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!

Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,

both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar

Both to my God and to my gracious king,

bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I

bounteous.

Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel

branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she

Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,

Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think

Break we our watch up, and by my advice

Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds

breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine

breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got

Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,

Bring him before us.

Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from

Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!

but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.

But age with his stealing steps

But answer made it none. Yet once methought

but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

But as we often see against some storm

But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?

But, better looked into, he truly found

But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

But do not dull thy palm with entertainment

But do not go with it.

But even his mother shall uncharge the practice

But even then the morning cock crew loud,

But fall unshaken when they mellow be.

But farewell it, for I will use no art.

But from what cause he will by no means speak.

But greatly to find quarrel in a straw

But he's an arrant knave.

But, howsomever thou pursues this act,

But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall

But I am very sorry, good Horatio,

but I cannot choose but weep to think they would

But I do prophesy th' election lights

But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,

But if the gods themselves did see her then

But, if you hold it fit, after the play

But I have that within which passes show,

But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,

But in battalions: first, her father slain;

But in our circumstance and course of thought

But in the gross and scope of mine opinion

But is there no sequel at the heels of this

but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks

But it reserved some quantity of choice

But I will delve one yard below their mines

But keep a farm and carters.

But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.

But let me hear from you.

But let that go.

But let this same be presently performed

But, like the owner of a foul disease,

But look, amazement on thy mother sits.

But look, the morn in russet mantle clad

But look where sadly the poor wretch comes

But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,

But mere implorators of unholy suits,

But never doubt I love.

But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,

But not by him.

But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),

But not where I have aimed them.

But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--

But, orderly to end where I begun:

But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call

But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence

But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.

But since, so jump upon this bloody question,

But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips

But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!

But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,

But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.

But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me

But that I know love is begun by time

But that the dread of something after death,

But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]

But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,

But this eternal blazon must not be

But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.

But to confront the visage of offense?

But, to my mind, though I am native here

But to recover of us, by strong hand

But truly I do fear it.

But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.

but variable service--two dishes but to one table.

But virtue, as it never will be moved,

But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed

But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

But what is your affair in Elsinore?

But what we do determine oft we break.

But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--

But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?

But with a crafty madness keeps aloof

But with much forcing of his disposition.

But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword

But woe is me! You are so sick of late,

but yet I could accuse me of such things that it

But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother

But you'll be secret?

But you must know your father lost a father,

Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:

By Cock, they are to blame.

By desperate appliance are relieved

By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!

By heaven, it is as proper to our age

By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight

By his cockle hat and staff

By indirections find directions out.

By laborsome petition, and at last

By letters congruing to that effect,

By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes

By the o'ergrowth of some complexion

By this encompassment and drift of question

By what it fed on. And yet, within a month

by William Shakespeare

calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the

calf there.--Be the players ready?

"Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes

Call me what instrument you will, though you can

Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose

cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure

cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.

cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall

Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?

Can you advise me?

Capitol. Brutus killed me.

capons so.

Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,

CAPTAIN

CAPTAIN

CAPTAIN

CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.

CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]

CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.

CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.

carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very

Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,

Carve for himself, for on his choice depends

certain.

certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at

changes

chapless and knocked about the mazard with a

Characters in the Play

chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and

choler.

Christian burial.

Christian burial.

Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and

Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,

[Claudius rises.]

closet ere you go to bed.

Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,

Collected from all simples that have virtue

color. I know the good king and queen have sent for

Come.

come by and by.

Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.

Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,

Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

Come, for England.	[He exits.]

Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.

Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends

Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.

Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.

Come hither, gentlemen,

Come, I will give you way for these your letters

Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.

Comes armed through our watch so like the king

Come short of what he did.

comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours

Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--

Come, some music!

Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?

commandment. If not, your pardon and my return

commeddled

Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.

condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The

Confederate season, else no creature seeing,

Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed

Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand

conscience

conscience.

Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!

Consent to swear.

Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot

Contagious blastments are most imminent.

continent of what part a gentleman would see.

Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,

conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,

CORNELIUS

Cornelius.]

CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND

corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]

Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,

Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]

Could force his soul so to his own conceit

Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?

Could not with all their quantity of love

could you not?

Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed

count myself a king of infinite space, were it not

Courtiers at the Danish court:

Craves the conveyance of a promised march

Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,

Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot

Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,

custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily

Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,

damned

Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

Danish soldiers:

Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet

daughter.

daughter?

daughter that I love passing well.

Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!

deceived.

Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.

Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown

delight in, the tragedians of the city.

delights not me"?

delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by

Denmark.

Denmark?

Denmark, and those that would make mouths at

Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,

desert.

Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--

Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--

Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.

Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands

Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy

Did nothing.

Did not together pluck such envy from him

Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,

Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,

Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;

Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

Did you not speak to it?

Dies in his own too-much. That we would do

Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw

differences, of very soft society and great showing.

digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another

dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in

Directly seasons him his enemy.

Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,

Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.

discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the

diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you

distempered.

distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your

Divided from herself and her fair judgment,

do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters

DOCTOR

DOCTOR  No more be done.

Doctor of Divinity

Does by their own insinuation grow.

does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him

Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--

Does not divide the Sunday from the week.

dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a

Do I impart toward you. For your intent

Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,

Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,

Do not forever with thy vailed lids

Do not itself unkennel in one speech,

Do not, my lord.

Doomed for a certain term to walk the night

Dost know this waterfly?

Doth all the noble substance of a doubt

Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?

Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,

Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat

Doubt that the sun doth move,

Doubt thou the stars are fire,

Doubt truth to be a liar,

Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?

Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it

Do you not come your tardy son to chide,

do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?

Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?

drowned herself wittingly.

Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]

[Drum, trumpets, and shot.]

dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow

each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is

Each opposite that blanks the face of joy

Each small annexment, petty consequence,

Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.

Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,

Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most

easiness.

Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste

eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed

edge.

Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles

eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine

either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense

else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself

Elsinore?

embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of

encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries

England.

enough. God hath given you one face, and you

[Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen

[Enter a Lord.]

[Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with

[Enter a Messenger.]

[Enter a Messenger with letters.]

[Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]

[Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]

[Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with

[Enter Ghost.]

[Enter Ghost.]

[Enter Ghost.]

[Enter Ghost.]

[Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]

[Enter Gravedigger and Another.]

[Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]

[Enter Hamlet.]

[Enter Hamlet.]

[Enter Hamlet.]

[Enter Hamlet.]

[Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]

[Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]

[Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]

[Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]

[Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]

[Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]

[Enter Horatio.]

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]

[Enter Horatio and others.]

[Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]

[Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]

[Enter King.]

[Enter King and Laertes.]

[Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and

[Enter King and two or three.]

[Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the

[Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,

[Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]

[Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]

[Enter Laertes with others.

[Enter Lucianus.]

[Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]

[Enter Ophelia.]

[Enter Ophelia.]

[Enter Ophelia distracted.]

[Enter Osric.]

[Enter Osric, a courtier.]

[Enter Polonius.]

[Enter Polonius.]

[Enter Polonius.]

[Enter Polonius.]

[Enter Polonius.]

[Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]

[Enter Prologue.]

[Enter Queen.]

[Enter Queen and Polonius.]

[Enter Rosencrantz.]

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]

[Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]

[Enter Sailors.]

entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

[Enter the Player King and Queen.]

[Enter the Players.]

[Enter the Players with recorders.]

[Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,

epitaph than their ill report while you live.

Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears

ere you had done.

Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great

Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow

Even in their promise as it is a-making,

Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

even, sir.--

Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,

Even while men's minds are wild, lest more

Even with the very comment of thy soul

exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for

excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging

except my life, except my life.

Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.

Excitements of my reason and my blood,

Exposing what is mortal and unsure

Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,

eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are

eyes.

Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,

Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.

Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.

Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I

Fall ten times treble on that cursed head

Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.

Farewell, dear mother.

Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.

Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well

Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]

Fare you well, my dove.

fashion and so berattle the common stages (so

fashion i' th' earth?

fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves

Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,

fee

Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,

Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,

Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,

fellowship in a cry of players?

Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden

figure?

find him not there, seek him i' th' other

Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew

firmament, this majestical roof, fretted

FIRST PLAYER

FIRST PLAYER

FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?

fitted.

Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,

flattered?

[Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]

[Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the

[Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and

flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon

foe,

foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]

Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,

Folger Shakespeare Library

Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.

Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.

Follow my mother.	[King dies.]

foolish ear.

For and a shrouding sheet,

for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks

For art and exercise in your defense,

For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,

For by the image of my cause I see

[Forcing him to drink the poison.]

Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.

For England.

forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.

(For every man hath business and desire,

For food and diet to some enterprise

For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,

For good Polonius' death, and we have done but

For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,

For Hecuba!

For he himself is subject to his birth.

For her perfections. But my revenge will come.

For he was likely, had he been put on,

For husband shalt thou--

For if the King like not the comedy,

for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two

For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,

For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,

For, in the fatness of these pursy times,

for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,

For it is as the air, invulnerable,

For like the hectic in my blood he rages,

For loan oft loses both itself and friend,

for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is

For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.

Form of the thing (each word made true and good),

For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak

For nature, crescent, does not grow alone

For out o' doors he went without their helps

For some must watch, while some must sleep:

(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)

For such a guest is meet.

For such a guest is meet.

For that which thou hast done) must send thee

Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,

For the apparel oft proclaims the man,

For the demand of our neglected tribute.

For the supply and profit of our hope,

for the very substance of the ambitious is merely

For they are actions that a man might play;

for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the

For this effect defective comes by cause.

For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,

For thou dost know, O Damon dear,

For though I am not splenitive and rash,

for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as

FORTINBRAS

FORTINBRAS

Fortinbras.

FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]

FORTINBRAS  Let four captains

FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it

FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway

FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?

For 'tis a question left us yet to prove

for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much

For 'tis the sport to have the enginer

Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?

For us and for our tragedy,

For use almost can change the stamp of nature

Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,

For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,

For we will fetters put about this fear,

For what advancement may I hope from thee

For what we know must be and is as common

For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,

For who not needs shall never lack a friend,

For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,

For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,

For women fear too much, even as they love,

For your desire to know what is between us,

for your dull ass will not mend his pace with

for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO  Barnardo?

[Francisco exits.]

FRANCISCO  Give you good night.

FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.

Free me so far in your most generous thoughts

fret me, you cannot play upon me.

friend, look to 't.

friends.

Friends both, go join you with some further aid.

From another one?

From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?

from me to you.

From me, whose love was of that dignity

from my lowest note to the top of my compass;

From our achievements, though performed at

From that particular fault. The dram of evil

From the fair forehead of an innocent love

From the first corse till he that died today,

From whence though willingly I came to Denmark

Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round

further.

gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.

'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have

gallows does well. But how does it well? It does

gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the

gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.

galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been

GENTLEMAN

gentleman in our more rawer breath?

GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have

GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,

Gentlemen

GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

Gertrude.--

Get from him why he puts on this confusion,

Get you a place.

GHOST

GHOST

GHOST

GHOST

GHOST

GHOST

[Ghost and Hamlet exit.]

[Ghost beckons.]

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.

GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.

GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation

[Ghost exits.]

[Ghost exits.]

[Ghost exits.]

GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,

GHOST  I find thee apt;

GHOST  My hour is almost come

Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.

Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.

Give him the cup.

Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

Give it an understanding but no tongue.

Give me my father!

Give me one poor request.

Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.

Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;

Given private time to you, and you yourself

Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual

Gives me superfluous death.

Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,

Give us the foils. Come on.

give you some violets, but they withered all when

Giving more light than heat, extinct in both

[Giving them a paper.]

Giving to you no further personal power

gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you

Go, bid the soldiers shoot.

Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.

God 'a mercy on his soul.

God bless you, sir.

God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,

Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,

Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked

Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You

good actor.

Good gentlemen, give him a further edge

Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,

Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--

Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,

good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to

Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.

Good my lord, tell it.

Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.

Good night, mother.

Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,

"Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"

Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body

Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot

Go to thy deathbed.

Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.

Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,

Grating so harshly all his days of quiet

Gravedigger

GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!

GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can

GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,

GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die

GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.

GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.

GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;

GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.

GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned

GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The

GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,

GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be

GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.

GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't

GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest

Gravedigger's companion

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]

GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again

GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.

GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There

GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.

GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou

GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more

GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis

grave-maker?

grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.

greenly

greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.

Groped I to find out them; had my desire,

grown honest.

Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,

GUILDENSTERN

GUILDENSTERN

GUILDENSTERN

GUILDENSTERN

GUILDENSTERN

Guildenstern.]

Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do

Guildenstern and Attendants.]

Guildenstern, and Lords.]

GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?

GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.

GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any

GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,

GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.

GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into

GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word

GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.

GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?

GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous

GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.

GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not

GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.

GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my

GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing

GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?

GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--

GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great

GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.

GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.

GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?

GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,

Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart

Had he the motive and the cue for passion

Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,

Had it th' ability of life to thank you.

Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,

Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven

hadst thou!

Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,

Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,

Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,

halt for 't. What players are they?

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

Hamlet

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

Hamlet.

Hamlet,

Hamlet.

Hamlet.

HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.

HAMLET, [advancing]

HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,

HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the

HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--

HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!

HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat

HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?

HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,

HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.

HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?

[Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]

HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]

HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent

HAMLET  Are you fair?

HAMLET, [aside]

HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If

HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.

HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,

HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,

HAMLET  As woman's love.

HAMLET  At supper.

HAMLET  A whole one, I.

HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.

HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,

HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be

HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the

HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,

HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to

HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?

HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner

HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;

HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own

HAMLET  Between who?

HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]

HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?

HAMLET  But where was this?

HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for

HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.

HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,

HAMLET  Come on, sir.

Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake

HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.

HAMLET  Do not believe it.

HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this

HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?

HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did

HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?

HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in

HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?

HAMLET  Ecstasy?

HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I

HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.

[Hamlet exits.]

[Hamlet exits.]

HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play

HAMLET  For England?

HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!

HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead

HAMLET  From top to toe?

HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.

HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be

HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every

HAMLET  Good.

HAMLET  Good madam.

HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?

HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?

HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at

HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He

HAMLET  Hear you, sir,

HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he

HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His

HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his

HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]

HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!

HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?

HAMLET  Hold off your hands.

HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by

HAMLET  How came he mad?

HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,

HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

HAMLET  How if I answer no?

HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?

HAMLET  How long is that since?

HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?

HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?

HAMLET  How "strangely"?

HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the

HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow

HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a

HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.

HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.

HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to

HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,

HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare

HAMLET  I do beseech you.

HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I

HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play

HAMLET  I embrace it freely

HAMLET  If she should break it now!

HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague

HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well

HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.

HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?

HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.

HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

HAMLET  In happy time.

HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger

Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,

HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.

HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!

HAMLET  Into my grave?

HAMLET  I pray you.

HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;

HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?

HAMLET  Is 't possible?

HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.

HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages

HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of

HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of

HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--

HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a

HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine

HAMLET  I will.

HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the

HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of

HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation

HAMLET  I will watch tonight.

HAMLET  I would I had been there.

HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it

HAMLET  Judgment!

HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a

HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may

HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?

HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's

HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means

HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.

HAMLET  Murder?

HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,

HAMLET  My fate cries out

HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius

HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.

HAMLET  Nay, but to live

HAMLET  Nay, come again.

HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,

HAMLET  Nay, I know not.

HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?

HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.

HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is

HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.

HAMLET  No, by this hand.

HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,

HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more

HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you

HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No

HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?

HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?

HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the

HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a

HAMLET  Nothing.

HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a

HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A

HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?

HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.

HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.

HAMLET  Of him, sir.

HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and

HAMLET  O God!

HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and

HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a

HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for

HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!

HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure

HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!

HAMLET  One.

HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play

HAMLET  Or like a whale.

HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good

HAMLET  O, wonderful!

HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!

HAMLET  Pale or red?

HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude

Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.

HAMLET  Safely stowed.

HAMLET  Saw who?

HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]

HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.

HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in

HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.

HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.

HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his

HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here

HAMLET  So be it.

HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,

HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,

HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.

HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced

HAMLET  Such an act

HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.

HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor

HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine

HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty

HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.

HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'

HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing

HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--

HAMLET  That's wormwood!

HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure

HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not

HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the

Hamlet the Dane.

HAMLET  The King my father?

HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?

HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.

HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs

HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.

HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not

HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.

HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.

HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?

HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the

HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the

HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the

HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.

HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out

HAMLET  This?

Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety

HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.

Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]

HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment

HAMLET  'Tis very strange.

HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of

HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?

HAMLET, [to Laertes]

HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of

HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your

HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!

HAMLET  Up from my cabin,

HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?

HAMLET  Upon what ground?

HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?

HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you

HAMLET  Very well, my lord.

HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.

HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a

HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players

HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.

HAMLET  What?

HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?

HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?

HAMLET  What did you enact?

HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?

HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!

HAMLET  What hour now?

HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?

HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?

HAMLET  What's his weapon?

HAMLET  What's the matter now?

HAMLET  What woman then?

HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?

HAMLET  Who, I?

HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?

HAMLET  Whose was it?

HAMLET  Why,

HAMLET  Why,

HAMLET  Why?

HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man

HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,

HAMLET  Why he more than another?

HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing

HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.

HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is

HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?

HAMLET  With drink, sir?

HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!

Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and

HAMLET  Words, words, words.

HAMLET  You are welcome.

HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I

HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend

HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer

HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue

[Handing him a paper.]

Haply the seas, and countries different,

Happy in that we are not overhappy.

has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.

Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift

Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those

Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be

Hath clawed me in his clutch,

Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.

Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there

Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave

Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared

Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws

Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been

hath the daintier sense.

Hath there been such a time (I would fain know

Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,

Have after. To what issue will this come?

have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your

have been in continual practice. I shall win at the

Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,

Have, by the very cunning of the scene,

Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated

Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege

Have of your audience been most free and

have seen play and heard others praise (and that

Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,

Have you any further trade with us?

Have you forgot me?

have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of

Have you so slander any moment leisure

Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?

Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes

having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of

Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow

head.

head.

head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of

He answers:

heart,

Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--

Heavens make our presence and our practices

Heaven will direct it.

He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.

He closes with you in this consequence:

[He digs up a skull.]

[He digs up more skulls.]

He does confess he feels himself distracted,

[He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He falls.]

He falls to such perusal of my face

[He gives a paper.]

he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him

He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders

He hath not failed to pester us with message

height,

He is dead and gone;

He is gone, he is gone,

[He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier

He likewise gives a frock or livery

hell,

Help, ho!

He may approve our eyes and speak to it.

He may not, as unvalued persons do,

hence

He never gave commandment for their death.

He never will come again.

He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.

[He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]

[He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]

her.

He raised a sigh so piteous and profound

Her brother is in secret come from France,

[He reads the letter.]

[He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the

Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,

Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.

Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,

Here in the lobby.

Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear

Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.

Here stooping to your clemency,

Here's to thy health.

Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]

Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,

Here was a gentleman of Normandy.

Her father and myself, lawful espials,

Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home

Her obsequies have been as far enlarged

Herod. Pray you, avoid it.

herself in her own defense?

her soul, she's dead.

He seemed to find his way without his eyes,

[He sheathes his sword.]

He should those bearers put to sudden death,

he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

He's loved of the distracted multitude,

He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.

He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,

He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found

He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,

He that thou knowest thine,

He took me by the wrist and held me hard.

He took my father grossly, full of bread,

He was a man. Take him for all in all,

He waxes desperate with imagination.

He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.

[He writes.]

Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,

Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.

highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither

High on a stage be placed to the view,

him

him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might

Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads

him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,

him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We

His access to me.

His beard was as white as snow,

His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,

His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.

His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,

His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,

his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come

His further gait herein, in that the levies,

His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,

His liberty is full of threats to all--

His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.

His means of death, his obscure funeral

His nephew's levies, which to him appeared

his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more

his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,

his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the

his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the

His silence will sit drooping.

historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,

His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,

hither are they coming to offer you service.

hits.

hobby-horse is forgot."

hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the

Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard

Holding a weak supposal of our worth

Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,

hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for

Holds such an enmity with blood of man

hold their course for England; of them I have

Hold you the watch tonight?

home;

honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,

Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind

hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO  A piece of him.

HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.

HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.

HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.

HORATIO  Ay, my lord.

HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.

HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of

HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.

HORATIO  E'en so.

HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.

[Horatio exits.]

[Horatio exits.]

HORATIO  Friends to this ground.

HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.

HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.

HORATIO  Half a share.

HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant

HORATIO  Heavens secure him!

HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.

HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words

HORATIO  How was this sealed?

HORATIO  I beseech you.

HORATIO  I did very well note him.

HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will

HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent

HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.

HORATIO  Is it a custom?

HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another

HORATIO  Is 't possible?

HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.

HORATIO  It might, my lord.

HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.

HORATIO  I warrant it will.

HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.

HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not

HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.

HORATIO  My lord, I did,

HORATIO  My lord, my lord!

HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--

HORATIO  Never believe it.

HORATIO  No, by no means.

HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.

HORATIO  Not from his

Horatio--or I do forget myself!

HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?

HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.

HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have

HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!

Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy

HORATIO  That can I.

HORATIO  That is most

HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.

HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his

Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man

HORATIO  'Tis here.

HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider

HORATIO  Very well, my lord.

HORATIO  Well, my lord.

HORATIO  Well, sit we down,

HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?

HORATIO  What is it you would see?

HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.

HORATIO  What news, my lord?

HORATIO  What's that, my lord?

HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!

HORATIO  You might have rhymed.

HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.

horses, against the which he has impawned, as I

hours.

How all occasions do inform against me

How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality

How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.

How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.

How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!

How does my good Lord Hamlet?

How does the Queen?

How does your Honor for this many a day?

Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.

how express and admirable; in action how like

How in my words somever she be shent,

How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

How is 't, my noble lord?

How much I had to do to calm his rage!

How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.

How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.

How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of

How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?

How now, what hath befallen?

How now? What news?

How say you, then? Would heart of man once think

How should I your true love know

How smart a lash that speech doth give my

How strange or odd some'er I bear myself

How these things came about. So shall you hear

How to forget that learning; but, sir, now

How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable

https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/hamlet/

hundred.

Hunts not the trail of policy so sure

Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,

Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother

I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--

I am justly killed with mine own treachery.

I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.

I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.

I am sorry that with better heed and judgment

I am sorry they offend you, heartily;

I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good

I bought an unction of a mountebank

I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.

I cannot dream of. I entreat you both

I cannot live to hear the news from England.

I could a tale unfold whose lightest word

I could not but by her. The other motive

I dare damnation. To this point I stand,

I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.

I did repel his letters and denied

I do believe you think what now you speak,

I do beseech you give him leave to go.

I do not fear it; I have seen you both.

I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

I do not set my life at a pin's fee.

I do receive your offered love like love

I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so

I doubt it is no other but the main--

I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!

If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

If by direct or by collateral hand

If circumstances lead me, I will find

If damned custom have not brazed it so

If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,

If Hamlet give the first or second hit

If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,

If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing

If his chief good and market of his time

if I could see the puppets dallying.

If I had played the desk or table-book

If it assume my noble father's person,

If it be made of penetrable stuff,

If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,

If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd

If, once a widow, ever I be wife.

If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their

if philosophy could find it out.

If she unmask her beauty to the moon.

If 't be th' affliction of his love or no

If that his Majesty would aught with us,

If there be any good thing to be done

If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.

If thou art privy to thy country's fate,

If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,

If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,

If thou didst ever thy dear father love--

If thou hast any sound or use of voice,

If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.

If with too credent ear you list his songs

If you desire to know the certainty

If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,

If you have hitherto concealed this sight,

If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his

I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.

I had my father's signet in my purse,

I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle

I ha 't!

I have a daughter (have while she is mine)

I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,

I have a voice and precedent of peace

I have in quick determination

I have seen myself, and served against, the French,

I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed

I have sent to seek him and to find the body.

I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,

I have sworn 't.

I hear him coming.

I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.

I, his sole son, do this same villain send

I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,

I hold my duty as I hold my soul,

I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;

I know him well. He is the brooch indeed

I know my course. The spirit that I have seen

I like him not, nor stands it safe with us

I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.

I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance

I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord

I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.

I'll call upon you ere you go to bed

I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!

I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?

I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.

I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.

I'll rant as well as thou.

I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape

I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,

I'll visit you.

I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,

I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers

I loved you ever. But it is no matter.

I loved your father, and we love ourself,

I made to her in marriage, and to decline

Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,

Importing Denmark's health and England's too,

Importing health and graveness. Two months since

Importing the surrender of those lands

I must be cruel only to be kind.

I must to England, you know that.

In censure of his seeming.

Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.

Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season

Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.

Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or

Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:

Indeed would make one think there might be

In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,

In dreadful secrecy impart they did,

In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,

In equal scale weighing delight and dole)

Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,

In filial obligation for some term

In further evil?

In general synod take away her power,

In going back to school in Wittenberg,

In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--

In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,

In honorable fashion--

In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia

in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act

In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,

In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,

In neither aught, or in extremity.

In noise so rude against me?

In obstinate condolement is a course

Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;

In second husband let me be accurst.

In that and all things will we show our duty.

in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at

In the corrupted currents of this world,

In the dead waste and middle of the night,

In thee there is not half an hour's life.

in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.

In the most high and palmy state of Rome,

In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,

In the same figure like the King that's dead.

In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,

In this distracted globe. Remember thee?

Into a tow'ring passion.

Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.

Into the madness wherein now he raves

in trial.

In what particular thought to work I know not,

In which the majesty of buried Denmark

In youth when I did love, did love,

I once did hold it, as our statists do,

I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.

I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.

I pray you, go with me.

I pray you now receive them.

I pray you pass with your best violence.

I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.

I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,

I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,

is--

Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,

"I saw him enter such a house of sale"--

I saw him once. He was a goodly king.

I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"

I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.

Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.

Is by a forged process of my death

Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,

I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for

is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply

I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

I shall not look upon his like again.

I shall the effect of this good lesson keep

I should have fatted all the region kites

Is it not monstrous that this player here,

Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?

is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by

Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it

Is not this something more than fantasy?

Is not to stir without great argument,

Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,

Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,

Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--

I stand aloof and will no reconcilement

I stand in pause where I shall first begin

I stay too long. But here my father comes.

Is the great love the general gender bear him,

Is the main motive of our preparations,

Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens

Is thought-sick at the act.

Is very cunning in.

it?

it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,

it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the

It beckons you to go away with it

It came to pass, as most like it was--

It could not move thus.

It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know

It faded on the crowing of the cock.

It fits your wisdom so far to believe it

It had been so with us, had we been there.

I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou

It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,

it himself. There are no tongues else for 's

I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?

I think it be no other but e'en so.

I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,

It is a damned ghost that we have seen,

It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."

It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.

It is a nipping and an eager air.

It is a poison tempered by himself.

It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.

It is most retrograde to our desire,

It is not, nor it cannot come to good.

It is offended.

It is our trick; nature her custom holds,

It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.

it! It is the false steward that stole his master's

It lifted up its head and did address

It may be death.

It must be shortly known to him from England

it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,

I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.

Itself to motion, like as it would speak;

It sends some precious instance of itself

It shall as level to your judgment 'pear

It shall do well. But yet do I believe

It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,

It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

[It spreads his arms.]

it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the

it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth

It warms the very sickness in my heart

It was about to speak when the cock crew.

It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved

It was as I have seen it in his life,

It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.

It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.

It waves you to a more removed ground.

It will be laid to us, whose providence

It will be short. The interim's mine,

It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,

It will not speak. Then I will follow it.

It would be spoke to.

I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.

I will bestow him and will answer well

I will go pray.

I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]

I will requite your loves. So fare you well.

I will speak daggers to her, but use none.

I will take my leave of you.

I would fain prove so. But what might you think,

I would not hear your enemy say so,

I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth

I your commission will forthwith dispatch,

jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his

journeymen had made men, and not made them

keep,

Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING, [advancing with Polonius]

KING  Alas, alas!

[King and Queen exit with Attendants.]

King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but

KING  A Norman.

KING, [aside]

KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!

KING  At supper where?

KING  Attend!

KING  Ay, Hamlet.

King best service in the end. He keeps them like an

KING  But how hath she received his love?

KING  But where is he?

KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet

KING  Conceit upon her father.

KING  Dead.

"King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!

KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?

KING  Gertrude, do not drink.

KING  Give me some light. Away!

KING  Good Laertes,

KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no

KING  He made confession of you

King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.

KING  How do you, pretty lady?

KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?

KING  How long hath she been thus?

KING  How may we try it further?

KING  I do not think 't.

KING  If it be so, Laertes

KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These

KING  It falls right.

KING  It likes us well,

KING  It shall be so.

KING  Laertes, you shall hear

KING  Let him demand his fill.

KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.

KING  Let's further think of this,

KING  Not that I know.

KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?

KING  O, for two special reasons,

KING  O Gertrude, come away!

KING  O heavy deed!

KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!

KING  Part them. They are incensed.

KING  Pluck them asunder.

KING  Pretty Ophelia--

KING, [rising]

KING  She swoons to see them bleed.

King's jester.

KING  So you shall,

KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,

KING  Thanks, dear my lord.

KING  The doors are broke.

KING  The very same.

King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days

KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.

KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--

KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.

KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?

KING  We will try it.

KING  What dost thou mean by this?

KING  What do you call the play?

KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

KING  What is the cause, Laertes,

KING  Where is Polonius?

KING  Who shall stay you?

KING  Why, now you speak

KING  Will you know them, then?

knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall

know from what part of the world I should be

know not what we may be. God be at your table.

knows,

knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.

ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]

lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

Laertes,

LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance

LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.

LAERTES  A Norman was 't?

LAERTES, [aside]

LAERTES  Ay, my lord,

LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]

LAERTES  Come, one for me.

LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]

LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?

LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?

LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]

LAERTES  Have at you now!

LAERTES  He is justly served.

LAERTES, her brother

LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?

LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,

Laertes, I must commune with your grief,

LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.

LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me

LAERTES  I will do 't,

LAERTES  Know you the hand?

LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,

LAERTES  Let this be so.

LAERTES  My dread lord,

LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,

LAERTES  My will, not all the world.

LAERTES  No.

LAERTES  None but his enemies.

LAERTES  O, fear me not.

LAERTES  O, treble woe

LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]

"Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"

LAERTES  Think it no more.

LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.

LAERTES, [to Claudius]

LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.

Laertes, was your father dear to you?

LAERTES  Well, again.

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?

LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?

LAERTES  Where is my father?

LAERTES  Why ask you this?

[Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change

LAERTES  You mock me, sir.

laid on him by them, in his meed he's

land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his

Larded all with sweet flowers;

Larded with many several sorts of reasons

Last, and as much containing as all these,

last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,

lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a

laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators

lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of

Lay not that flattering unction to your soul

[Leaps in the grave.]

Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]

Led by a delicate and tender prince,

legs.

Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,

length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very

Lest with this piteous action you convert

Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.

Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged

Let Hercules himself do what he may,

Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.

Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him

Let in the maid, that out a maid

Let it be tenable in your silence still;

Let me be cruel, not unnatural.

Let me be no assistant for a state,

Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell

(Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),

Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil

Let not the royal bed of Denmark be

Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.

Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know

Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.

Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,

letters for you.

Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,

Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,

Let us impart what we have seen tonight

liest.

light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows

Like a good child and a true gentleman.

like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll

Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,

likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now

Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she

Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.

Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;

Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places

Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,

lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,

little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,

Lives almost by his looks, and for myself

Look here upon this picture and on this,

Looking before and after, gave us not

Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,

Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.

look upon me,

Look where he goes even now out at the portal!

lord?

"Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.

Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,

Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of

LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by

Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying

Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.

Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,

LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.

LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle

lost,

Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,

love, and by what more dear a better

Love? His affections do not that way tend;

love is too unmannerly.

LUCIANUS

Madam, I swear I use no art at all.

Madam, it so fell out that certain players

Mad as the sea and wind when both contend

"Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,

Mad for thy love?

Mad let us grant him then, and now remains

Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.

Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let

Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous

Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,

Make mad the guilty and appall the free,

Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,

Makes mouths at the invisible event,

Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.

Makes vow before his uncle never more

Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their

Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

Make us again count o'er ere love be done!

make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and

Make you to ravel all this matter out

Making night hideous, and we fools of nature

man after his desert and who shall 'scape

Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--

man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully

man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

Marcellus?

Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,

MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.

MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.

MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!

MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?

MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action

MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.

MARCELLUS  My good lord.

MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.

MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.

MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.

MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]

MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.

[March within.]

Mark me.

Mark the encounter. If he love her not,

Mark you, your party in converse, him you would

marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what

Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby

Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,

matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I

matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,

matter there.

May be a devil, and the devil hath power

may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear

May do t' express his love and friending to you,

May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,

May give his saying deed, which is no further

May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?

May sweep to my revenge.

May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,

me!

me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent

means of the late innovation.

Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.

meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,

Meet what I would have well and it destroy.

MESSENGER

MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from

MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.

method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,

method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

Methought it was very sweet

middle of her favors?

might,"

Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,

might it not?

might it not?

Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.

Millions of acres on us, till our ground,

mine.

Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,

mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,

mischance

mischief.

mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,

modesty as cunning. I remember one said there

money bid for argument unless the poet and the

monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and

months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's

more.

more appear like entertainment than yours. You are

more, for look where my abridgment comes.

More grief to hide than hate to utter love.

more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I

More honored in the breach than the observance.

more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have

Moreover that we much did long to see you,

More relative than this. The play's the thing

More than his father's death, that thus hath put him

More than in words?

morning, 'twas then indeed.

morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"

most beautified Ophelia--

most best, believe it. Adieu.

Most constantly.

Most fair return of greetings and desires.

Most free in his reply.

Most generous, and free from all contriving,

Most holy and religious fear it is

Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust

Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

Most necessary 'tis that we forget

most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable

Most throughly for my father.

most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the

Most welcome home!

Mother, good night indeed. This counselor

mother's admiration? Impart.

Mother, you have my father much offended.

mouth,

move

Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.

much to tell thee. Farewell.

murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.

murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and

Murder most foul, as in the best it is,

music. Look you, these are the stops.

Must give us pause. There's the respect

Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him

Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words

Must render up myself.

Must there no more be done?

my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet

my complexion.

My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.

My custom always of the afternoon,

my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I

my father died. They say he made a good end.

My father, in his habit as he lived!

My father--methinks I see my father.

My father's brother, but no more like my father

My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.

My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer

(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold

My head should be struck off.

My honored lord, you know right well you did,

my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung

My liege, and madam, to expostulate

My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,

My lord, he hath importuned me with love

My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.

My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

My lord, I have.

My lord, I have remembrances of yours

My lord, I'll hit him now.

My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

My lord, the King your father.

My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,

my mother looks, and my father died within 's two

My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.

My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

My operant powers their functions leave to do.

My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time

My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark

My soul is full of discord and dismay.

My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile

My stern effects. Then what I have to do

My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,

My tables--meet it is I set it down

My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France

My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!

My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:

My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,

(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),

My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;

my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship

naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to

name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in

nation

nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose

Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,

nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her

nature will.

Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

Nay, come, let's go together.

Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.

Nay, very pale.

need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen

Neither a borrower nor a lender be,

Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,

Never departed more.

Never make known what you have seen tonight.

Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.

Never to speak of this that you have heard.

Never to speak of this that you have seen,

New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,

next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes

Next, your son gone, and he most violent author

Niggard of question, but of our demands

night's speech.

nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your

No.

no better), their writers do them wrong to make

No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,

No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,

No, in despite of sense and secrecy,

noise?

No jocund health that Denmark drinks today

No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp

no longer than they can sing? Will they not say

No med'cine in the world can do thee good.

No more.

No more--and by a sleep to say we end

no more marriage. Those that are married already,

No more, sweet Hamlet!

No more to undertake it, I will work him

No, my good lord, but as you did command

None wed the second but who killed the first.

No noble rite nor formal ostentation)

No, no, he is dead.

No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,

No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!

No, not I. I never gave you aught.

No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,

No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;

Nor any unproportioned thought his act.

Nor customary suits of solemn black,

Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,

Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,

No reck'ning made, but sent to my account

Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,

Nor shall you do my ear that violence

Nor the dejected havior of the visage,

northerly.

Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]

Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,

Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole

Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,

Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it

nothing more.

Not I, my lord, by heaven.

Not of that dye which their investments show,

No traveler returns, puzzles the will

(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,

Not shriving time allowed.

not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his

Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.

Not that I think you did not love your father,

Not this by no means that I bid you do:

Not when I saw 't.

not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you

not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is

now.

Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,

Now falls on Priam.

Now fear I this will give it start again.

Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,

Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.

Now I am alone.

now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The

Now is he total gules, horridly tricked

Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,

Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,

now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,

Now out of this--

Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,

Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,

"Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.

now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be

now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to

Now wears his crown.

Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,

nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,

O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?

O, a pit of clay for to be made

observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of

Observe his inclination in yourself.

Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt

Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here

O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not

O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"

O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,

O'er this solidity and compound mass

O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,

O'er whom his very madness, like some ore

Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,

of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that

Of all their conference. If she find him not,

O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved

Of bell and burial.

Of blue Olympus.

Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,

Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,

Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,

Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware

Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,

offense in 't?

offense i' th' world.

Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,

of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more

Of general assault.

of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.

Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,

Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,

Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues

Of him that brought them.

Of his affection to me.

Of his behavior.

Of his own just remove; the people muddied,

of his purchases, and double ones too, than the

Of his true state.

Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.

Of Jove himself, and now reigns here

Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,

Of man and country--

of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?

Of mighty opposites.

Of mine own eyes.

Of my true mother.

of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved

of playing, whose end, both at the first and

Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.

(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),

Of that I shall have also cause to speak,

of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me

Of these dilated articles allow.

Of the unworthiest siege.

of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh

Of thinking too precisely on th' event

Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress

Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.

Of those effects for which I did the murder:

Of unimproved mettle hot and full,

of very liberal conceit.

Of violent birth, but poor validity,

Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge

Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,

O Gertrude, Gertrude,

(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason

O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,

O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!

O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!

O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever

O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt

O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits

O heavy burden!

O, here they come.

Oh, ho!

O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!

O, I am slain!

old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave

old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee

Old grandsire Priam seeks.

O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,

O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.

O most pernicious woman!

O, my dear lord--

O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!

O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;

once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if

One fair daughter, and no more,

One scene of it comes near the circumstance

One woe doth tread upon another's heel,

One word more, good lady.

On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.

On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,

On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.

On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.

On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,

On plots and errors happen.

On such regards of safety and allowance

On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone

On wholesome life usurp immediately.

on your head. Sir, this is the matter--

O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA  At home, my lord.

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the

OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce

OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?

OPHELIA  Good my lord,

OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!

OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,

OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.

OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.

OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.

OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.

OPHELIA  My lord?

OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,

OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.

OPHELIA  No more but so?

OPHELIA  No, my lord.

OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!

OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when

OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.

OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.

OPHELIA [sings]

OPHELIA [sings]

OPHELIA [sings]

OPHELIA [sings]

OPHELIA  Still better and worse.

OPHELIA  The King rises.

OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.

OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.

OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.

OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,

Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,

OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a

OPHELIA  What is, my lord?

OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?

OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?

OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?

OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.

OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.

OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the

OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you

or a carpenter?"

Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,

Or but a sickly part of one true sense

Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,

Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens

ordnance are shot off.]

or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the

Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!

Or for some frontier?

Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,

Or I could make a prologue to my brains,

Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life

Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they

Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,

Or is it some abuse and no such thing?

Or like a creature native and endued

Or looked upon this love with idle sight?

Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open

Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,

Or not at all.

Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,

Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,

Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.

Or quit in answer of the third exchange,

Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,

or so," and "gentleman."

Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note

Or that the Everlasting had not fixed

(Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you

Or thinking by our late dear brother's death

Or to take arms against a sea of troubles

Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff

Or with a little shuffling, you may choose

Or you deny me right. Go but apart,

O, say!

O, speak!

O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.

OSRIC

OSRIC

OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.

OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.

OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as

OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?

OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.

OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--

OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person

OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation

OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.

OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!

OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.

OSRIC  Nothing neither way.

OSRIC  Of Laertes?

OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.

OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?

OSRIC  Sir?

OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I

OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary

Osric to put on his hat.]

OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes

OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to

OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

O, step between her and her fighting soul.

O, that that earth which kept the world in awe

O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,

OTHER  But is this law?

O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a

OTHER  Go to!

OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave

OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.

OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.

OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--

OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a

OTHER  Was he a gentleman?

OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,

OTHER  Why, he had none.

OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.

OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been

O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!

O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs

O, throw away the worser part of it,

Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,

Our hasty sending. Something have you heard

Our indiscretion sometime serves us well

Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what

Our son shall win.

Our sovereign process, which imports at full,

Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,

Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.

Our wills and fates do so contrary run

our withers are unwrung.

out

Out of his brows.

Out of his subject; and we here dispatch

Out of my weakness and my melancholy,

Out of the shot and danger of desire.

Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods

out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me

O vengeance!

Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.

overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the

Over the nasty sty!

O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!

O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]

O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!

O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!

O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power

own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what

own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my

own image, and the very age and body of the time

own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.

own life.

O wretched state! O bosom black as death!

O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.

pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little

Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,

pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden

part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh

passes between yourself and him, he shall not

Passing through nature to eternity.

patience.

Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set

Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.

peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he

Perchance 'twill walk again.

performance,

periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very

Perpend.

piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the

Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,

Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing

pity that great folk should have count'nance in this

place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not

Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,

play.

play.

played once i' th' university, you say?

PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently

PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.

PLAYER KING

PLAYER KING

PLAYER KING

PLAYER KING

PLAYER QUEEN

PLAYER QUEEN

PLAYER QUEEN

[Player Queen exits.]

PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!

PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,

players (as it is most like, if their means are

[Players exit.]

[Players exit.]

players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday

Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>

player went to cuffs in the question.

Play something like the murder of my father

play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.

Pleasant and helpful to him!

pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will

Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?

plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of

poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor

[Pointing to Polonius.]

poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to

poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh

poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

Polonius.]

POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.

POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what

POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.

POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on

POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is

POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!

POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.

POLONIUS  Come, sirs.

POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?

[Polonius exits.]

[Polonius exits.]

[Polonius exits.]

POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.

POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius

POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good

POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.

POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.

[Polonius hides behind the arras.]

POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?

POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'

POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a

POLONIUS  I have, my lord.

POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How

POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.

POLONIUS  I will say so.

POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!

POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and

POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,

POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.

POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.

POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their

POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,

POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.

Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other

POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a

POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.

POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.

POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.

POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.

POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for

POLONIUS  This business is well ended.

POLONIUS  This is too long.

POLONIUS  'Tis most true,

POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?

POLONIUS  Upon my honor--

POLONIUS  Very like a whale.

POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.

POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?

POLONIUS  What do you think of me?

POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?

POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?

POLONIUS  What said he?

POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?

POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?

POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.

Popped in between th' election and my hopes,

Possess it merely. That it should come to this:

[Pours the poison in his ears.]

Pray you, be round with him.

Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,

pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness

[Prepare to play.]

prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the

Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at

Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or

progress through the guts of a beggar.

PROLOGUE

Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,

pronounced.

proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct

protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his

proverb is something musty.

Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a

Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay

purpose, confess thyself--

Purpose is but the slave to memory,

Pursued my life.

Put your dread pleasures more into command

Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;

quaintly

quality. Come, a passionate speech.

Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN  Alack,

QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?

QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.

QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,

QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.

QUEEN  Ay, amen!

QUEEN  Ay me, what act

QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.

QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?

QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.

QUEEN  Did he receive you well?

QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?

QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.

[Queen exits.]

QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.

QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius

QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!

QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--

QUEEN  How fares my lord?

QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?

QUEEN  If it be,

QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,

QUEEN  I shall obey you.

QUEEN  It may be, very like.

QUEEN  I will not speak with her.

QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]

QUEEN  More matter with less art.

QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--

QUEEN  No more!

QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.

QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!

QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?

QUEEN  O my son, what theme?

QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!

QUEEN  So he does indeed.

QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!

Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,

QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.

QUEEN  This is mere madness;

QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?

QUEEN  What shall I do?

QUEEN  What would she have?

question of the play be then to be considered.

question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the

quickly too. Farewell.

quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why

Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,

rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the

Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,

rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]

readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves

reading.

[Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set

ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as

reason.

reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving

Rebellious hell,

Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,

received it, and others whose judgments in such

receive from you. We coted them on the way, and

Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,

recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw

recorders!

recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great

recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full

relish of it. I loved you not.

Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless

Repast them with my blood.

Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,

replication should be made by the son of a king?

Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,

Requite him for your father.

Resembles that it was. What it should be,

Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.

responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and

rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two

rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an

Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,

returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth

returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The

revenge.

Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,

Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,

REYNALDO

REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.

REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,

REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.

REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.

REYNALDO  But, my good lord--

REYNALDO  Good my lord.

REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.

REYNALDO  I will, my lord.

REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.

REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.

REYNALDO, servant to Polonius

REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.

REYNALDO  Well, my lord.

Richer than that which four successive kings

Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.

ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules

ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?

ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties

ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such

ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of

ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.

ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to

ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the

ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the

ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.

ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted

ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.

ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's

ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her

ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.

ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.

ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in

ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?

ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy

ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.

ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?

ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.

ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?

Rough-hew them how we will--

Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.

Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames

Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.

safely,

SAILOR  God bless you, sir.

SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter

Sailors

Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.

sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I

Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,

savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict

say,

Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?

'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,

scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some

Scene 6

Scene 2

Scene 1

Scene 2

Scene 1

Scene 1

Scene 3

Scene 2

Scene 1

Scene 3

Scene 7

Scene 4

Scene 1

Scene 4

Scene 2

Scene 5

Scene 3

Scene 2

Scene 5

Scene 4

Season your admiration for a while

Seek for thy noble father in the dust.

Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top

"Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."

Seem to me all the uses of this world!

See what a grace was seated on this brow,

see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your

Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--

set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your

Set your entreatments at a higher rate

sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.

sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had

shall be dry again.

shall be the end of my business.

shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.

Shall in the general censure take corruption

Shall I strike it with my partisan?

shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall

shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but

Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot

Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

shape of a camel?

Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on

Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes

She is a strumpet. What news?

She is so conjunctive to my life and soul

[She lifts the cup.]

She married. O, most wicked speed, to post

[She scatters flowers.]

She should in ground unsanctified been lodged

She speaks much of her father, says she hears

She turns to favor and to prettiness.

should admit no discourse to your beauty.

Should be as mortal as an old man's life?

Should have a back or second that might hold

Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt

should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.

Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!

Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,

Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.

Since frost itself as actively doth burn,

Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands

Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice

Since nature cannot choose his origin),

Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear

Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red

Singeing his pate against the burning zone,

[Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,

[Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

[Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,

sings in grave-making.

[Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made

[Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,

[Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--

Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe

Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting

Sir, in this audience

Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.

Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means

Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man

Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,

Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof

skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his

snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a

so.

So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood

So bloodily hast struck?

So by his father lost. And this, I take it,

So by my former lecture and advice

So criminal and so capital in nature,

So excellent a king, that was to this

So far from cheer and from your former state,

So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.

So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,

So full of artless jealousy is guilt,

So grace and mercy at your most need help you.

So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.

So hallowed and so gracious is that time.

So have I heard and do in part believe it.

So horridly to shake our disposition

Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes

So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.

So levied as before, against the Polack,

So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,

So many journeys may the sun and moon

some frame and start not so wildly from my

Some little time, so by your companies

Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes

Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

something. Where did I leave?

So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,

So much as from occasion you may glean,

So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.

So much from th' understanding of himself

songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to

So nightly toils the subject of the land,

So oft it chances in particular men

So please you, something touching the Lord

So, proceed you.

So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,

So think thou wilt no second husband wed,

so. To me, it is a prison.

So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust

souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;

So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.

sound,

[Sound a flourish.]

"So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,

So you will not o'errule me to a peace.

speak.

speak.

Speak loudly for him.

Speak, man.

Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]

Speak to her, Hamlet.

Speak to me.

Speak to me.

special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be

spheres,

spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the

Sport and repose lock from me day and night,

Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?

Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?

Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt

Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me

Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,

Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.

Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.

Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!

Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love

Stick fiery off indeed.

Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.

Stood challenger on mount of all the age

Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash

stoup of liquor.

straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it

strew

Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,

struck her into amazement and admiration.

Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it

Such as it is), and for my own poor part,

Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?

Such love must needs be treason in my breast.

Such was the very armor he had on

sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same

Sure He that made us with such large discourse,

Swear by my sword

Swear by my sword.

sword,

Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive

Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.

take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their

Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,

take longer time.

Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred

Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,

Take these again, for to the noble mind

Take this from this, if this be otherwise.

Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,

Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this

Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,

tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,

T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,

Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,

Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear

Tell him that by his license Fortinbras

tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet

Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence

Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,

Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,

Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.

Than fly to others that we know not of?

Than is my deed to my most painted word.

Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.

Than I to Hercules. Within a month,

Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.

Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,

Than settled age his sables and his weeds,

Than that which dearest father bears his son

Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.

Than to entreaty.

than with honesty?

Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,

Than your particular demands will touch it.

Th' associates tend, and everything is bent

that)

That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,

That are but mutes or audience to this act,

That are so fortified against our story,

That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,

That beetles o'er his base into the sea,

That, being of so young days brought up with him

That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,

That both the worlds I give to negligence,

That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"

That cannot be, since I am still possessed

That capability and godlike reason

That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,

that day that our last King Hamlet overcame

That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.

That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me

That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.

That even our loves should with our fortunes change;

That ever I was born to set it right!

That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound

That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation

That for a fantasy and trick of fame

That for some vicious mole of nature in them,

That from a shelf the precious diadem stole

That from her working all his visage wanned,

That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature

That guilty creatures sitting at a play

That has no relish of salvation in 't--

That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other

That hath in it no profit but the name.

That have a father killed, a mother stained,

That he, as 'twere by accident, may here

That he could nothing do but wish and beg

That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed

That he is open to incontinency;

That he might not beteem the winds of heaven

That he should weep for her? What would he do

That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,

That he which hath your noble father slain

That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:

That I am guiltless of your father's death

That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,

That I essentially am not in madness,

That, if again this apparition come,

that I have bad dreams.

That I have? He would drown the stage with tears

That I have longed long to redeliver.

That I have positively said "'Tis so,"

That I have shot my arrow o'er the house

That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,

That I in forgery of shapes and tricks

That I might be the organ.

That I must be their scourge and minister.

That I must call 't in question.

That inward breaks and shows no cause without

That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point

That I shall live and tell him to his teeth

that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his

That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him

That it be proof and bulwark against sense.

That I, the son of a dear father murdered,

That it might please you to give quiet pass

That it went hand in hand even with the vow

That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"

That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by

That lend a tyrannous and a damned light

That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,

That live and feed upon your Majesty.

That looks so many fathoms to the sea

That makes calamity of so long life.

That may to thee do ease and grace to me,

That might your nature, honor, and exception

That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,

That no revenue hast but thy good spirits

That not your trespass but my madness speaks.

that often madness hits on, which reason and

that old men have gray beards, that their faces are

That one may smile and smile and be a villain.

That on the supervise, no leisure bated,

That, on the view and knowing of these contents,

That, opened, lies within our remedy.

That our devices still are overthrown;

That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,

That roars so loud and thunders in the index?

That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,

That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.

That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a

that's for thoughts.

That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?

That she should lock herself from his resort,

That show of such an exercise may color

That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.

That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so

That so his sickness, age, and impotence

That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests

That's the end.

that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this

That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,

That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition

That swift as quicksilver it courses through

That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and

That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger

That they do know my son, come you more nearer

That they may seem the taints of liberty,

That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,

That thou so many princes at a shot

That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?

That thus he suffers for.

That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--

That to Laertes I forgot myself,

That to the use of actions fair and good

That treason can but peep to what it would,

That unmatched form and stature of blown youth

That was and is the question of these wars.

That we are made of stuff so flat and dull

That we can let our beard be shook with danger

That we find out the cause of this effect,

That we with wisest sorrow think on him

That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay

That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,

That you do bend your eye on vacancy

That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,

That you know aught of me--this do swear,

That your good beauties be the happy cause

That youth and observation copied there,

That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court

T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,

The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a

The apparition comes. I knew your father;

the author of affection, but called it an honest

The bark is ready, and the wind at help,

The bell then beating one--

The better to beguile. This is for all:

The bold winds speechless, and the orb below

The canker galls the infants of the spring

The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,

the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the

The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.

The changeling never known. Now, the next day

The chariest maid is prodigal enough

The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,

The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand

The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.

The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,

The death I gave him. So, again, good night.

The devil himself.

The devil take thy soul!

The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]

thee.

The ears are senseless that should give us hearing

The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons

Th' effect of what I wrote?

the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can

the first row of the pious chanson will show you

The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,

the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the

the force of honesty can translate beauty into his

The form of plausive manners--that these men,

The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,

THE GHOST

The glass of fashion and the mold of form,

The glowworm shows the matin to be near

The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead

The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;

The hand more instrumental to the mouth,

The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art

The hart ungalled play.

The head and source of all your son's distemper.

The head is not more native to the heart,

The hearers to collection. They aim at it

The heartache and the thousand natural shocks

The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble

The imminent death of twenty thousand men

The insolence of office, and the spurns

The instances that second marriage move

The instant burst of clamor that she made

The inward service of the mind and soul

their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no

Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,

Their own enactures with themselves destroy.

their trial, the bubbles are out.

The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out

The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,

The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,

the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is

The leprous distilment, whose effect

The light and careless livery that it wears

The lists, and full proportions are all made

The lives of many. The cess of majesty

them,

them.

them.--

The memory be green, and that it us befitted

the men are as mad as he.

them exclaim against their own succession?

them, for there be of them that will themselves

them, for they say an old man is twice a child.

them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling

them through and through the most fanned

them to controversy. There was for a while no

The natural gates and alleys of the body,

Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,

Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,

The need we have to use you did provoke

The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.

Then goes he to the length of all his arm,

Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.

The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,

Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,

Then up he rose and donned his clothes

Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain

The ocean, overpeering of his list,

The origin and commencement of his grief

[The Other Man exits

The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,

The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.

The perfume and suppliance of a minute,

The pith and marrow of our attribute.

the play, I remember, pleased not the million:

The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy

The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.

The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.

The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.

The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,

The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

[The Queen falls.]

The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?

The rather if you could devise it so

The ratifiers and props of every word,

thereabout of it especially when he speaks of

There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,

There falling out at tennis"; or perchance

Therefore I have entreated him along

Therefore, let's follow.

Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,

Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,

Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,

There is a play tonight before the King.

There is a willow grows askant the brook

There is no shuffling; there the action lies

There lives within the very flame of love

There, my lord.

There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave

There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds

There's a divinity that shapes our ends,

There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,

There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves

There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark

There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we

There's such divinity doth hedge a king

There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her

Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,

There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,

Therewith fantastic garlands did she make

The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,

The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--

The safety and the health of this whole state.

The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.

These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

these are the only men.

These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

These hands are not more like.

The serpent that did sting thy father's life

These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.

These words like daggers enter in my ears.

the shadow of a dream.

The single and peculiar life is bound

The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,

The soldier's music and the rite of war

The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.

The source of this our watch, and the chief head

The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.

the stairs into the lobby.

The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch

The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]

The terms of our estate may not endure

The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,

the time gives it proof. I did love you once.

The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.

The time is out of joint. O cursed spite

The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,

the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the

The triumph of his pledge.

[The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]

The trumpet to the cannoneer without,

the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of

The undiscovered country from whose bourn

The unseen good old man.

The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.

The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,

The very place puts toys of desperation,

The very soul, and sweet religion makes

The violence of either grief or joy

The virtue of his will; but you must fear,

The which he loved passing well.

The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.

The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,

The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.

Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,

Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies

They are not near my conscience. Their defeat

they ask you what it means, say you this:

They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way

They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?

They bore him barefaced on the bier,

they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid

They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase

They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"

[They enter with Hamlet.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]

[They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of

They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,

They had begun the play. I sat me down,

They have proclaimed their malefactions;

The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured

They shall go far with little.

They were given me by Claudio. He received them

[They withdraw.]

Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and

thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh

thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to

Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,

Th' important acting of your dread command?

thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too

Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst

Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind

This above all: to thine own self be true,

This bad begins, and worse remains behind.

This bird of dawning singeth all night long;

This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

This bodiless creation ecstasy

This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet

this gentleman?

This grave shall have a living monument.

This heavy-headed revel east and west

this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my

This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.

This is the very coinage of your brain.

This is the very ecstasy of love,

This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,

This is too heavy. Let me see another.

This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

this line--let me see, let me see:

this machine is to him, Hamlet.

This mad young man. But so much was our love,

This man shall set me packing.

This marvel to you.

This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my

This might be the pate of a politician which this ass

This must be known, which, being kept close, might

"This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth

This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,

This night to play before him.

This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.

This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.

This present object made probation.

This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,

This realm dismantled was

This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the

This something-settled matter in his heart,

this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players

This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.

This sudden sending him away must seem

This unprevailing woe and think of us

This warlike volley.

This was your husband. Look you now what follows.

this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)

This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange

Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!

Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,

Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,

those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.

Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.

Thou canst not then be false to any man.

Thou com'st in such a questionable shape

Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.

Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's

though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I

Though inclination be as sharp as will.

Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,

Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

thought,

Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself

thoughts.

Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time

Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death

Thou knowest already.

Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,

Thou livest; report me and my cause aright

Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,

thousand tenants.

Thou still hast been the father of good news.

Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,

Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.

three-and-twenty years.

Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats

through the arras.]

Through your dominions for this enterprise,

Thrown out his angle for my proper life,

Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,

thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander

Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,

"Thus didst thou."

Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.

Thus much the business is: we have here writ

Thus runs the world away.

Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England

Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,

Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand

th' worst.

Thy knotted and combined locks to part,

Thy natural magic and dire property

thyself,

Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.

Till by some elder masters of known honor

Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.

Till of this flat a mountain you have made

Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,

Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,

Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature

Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers

Till then in patience our proceeding be.

Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,

time. After your death you were better have a bad

Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.

'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes

'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.

'Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou

'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,

'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged

'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,

'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,

'tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:

'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

'Tis now the very witching time of night,

'Tis strange.

'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,

'Tis told me he hath very oft of late

('Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage

'Tis too narrow for your mind.

To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,

To an exploit, now ripe in my device,

To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]

To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,

To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom

To be commanded.

To be contracted in one brow of woe,

To be forestalled ere we come to fall,

to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have

To be or not to be--that is the question:

To be your Valentine.

To both your honors.

To business with the King more than the scope

To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions

To cast thee up again. What may this mean

To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,

To desperation turn my trust and hope,

To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever

To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:

To draw apart the body he hath killed,

To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather

To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!

To England send him, or confine him where

T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head

To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be

To flaming youth let virtue be as wax

To fust in us unused. Now whether it be

together

Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,

Together with remembrance of ourselves.

Together with that fair and warlike form

To give in evidence. What then? What rests?

To give it due content.

To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.

To give them seals never, my soul, consent.

To give these mourning duties to your father.

To give the world assurance of a man.

To grunt and sweat under a weary life,

To have proved most royal; and for his passage,

To hear and see the matter.

To hear him so inclined.

To hear of it. They are here about the court,

To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him

To heaven.

To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!

To hide the slain? O, from this time forth

To him from whom you brought them.

To his confine, and of the truth herein

To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms

To his own scandal.

To his unmastered importunity.

To keep it from divulging, let it feed

To keep itself from noyance, but much more

To keep my name ungored. But till that time

To keep those many many bodies safe

To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.

[To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last

to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary

To lay our service freely at your feet,

To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.

To let this canker of our nature come

To let you know of it.

To make it truster of your own report

To make oppression bitter, or ere this

To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,

To mine own room again, making so bold

tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to

To muddy death.

To my revenge; but in my terms of honor

tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.

To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,

To offer it the show of violence,

Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,

too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;

Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,

Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,

To our most valiant brother--so much for him.

To outface me with leaping in her grave?

To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;

To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.

To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.

To punish me with this and this with me,

To put an antic disposition on)

[To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit

To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be

torches.]

To reason most absurd, whose common theme

to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my

To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't

To show his grief. Let her be round with him;

To show my duty in your coronation,

To show us so much gentry and goodwill

To show yourself indeed your father's son

to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to

To sing a requiem and such rest to her

To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,

To sound what stop she please. Give me that man

To speak of horrors--he comes before me.

To take him in the purging of his soul,

To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,

To tell my story.

To tell the secrets of my prison house,

To tell us this.

To th' ambassadors of England gives

To the inheritance of Fortinbras

To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,

[To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.

To the next abstinence, the next more easy;

To the unsatisfied.

To thine own peace. If he be now returned,

To those of mine.

To try conclusions, in the basket creep

Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.

To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy

To what I shall unfold.

To whom he more adheres. If it will please you

To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things

town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air

To you alone.

To you in satisfaction; but if not,

To youth and liberty.

To you yourself, to us, to everyone.

trade that he will keep out water a great while; and

tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,

tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or

transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than

Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name

Treachery! Seek it out.

true. Let me question more in particular. What

truepenny?

Truly deliver.

Truly to speak, and with no addition,

[Trumpets the while.]

Try what repentance can. What can it not?

turn.

Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.

'twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I

Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat

'Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project

'twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!

'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may

'twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty

Two Messengers

Two nights together had these gentlemen,

Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats

Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice

uncle,

understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam

Under the moon, can save the thing from death

Under the which he shall not choose but fall;

unfellowed.

Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,

Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,

Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

(Unless things mortal move them not at all)

Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!

Unpeg the basket on the house's top,

Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.

Until my eyelids will no longer wag!

Unto our climatures and countrymen.

Unto that element. But long it could not be

Unto the voice and yielding of that body

Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,

Upon a fearful summons. I have heard

Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor

Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.

Upon my life, Lamord.

Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole

Upon my sword.

Upon our first, he sent out to suppress

Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper

Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,

Upon the witness of these gentlemen

upon this pipe?

Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,

Upon whose property and most dear life

Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.

us

us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on

utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.

verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great

very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the

very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses

Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now

vile king,

vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]

villain!

Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,

Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.

Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,

voice of the King himself for your succession in

VOLTEMAND

VOLTEMAND

[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.

wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'

was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my

was an actor in Rome--

Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,

was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.

was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?

Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests

Was gaged by our king, which had returned

was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say

was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for

Was not like madness. There's something in his soul

Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent

Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.

Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.

We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]

We cannot get from him.

We do it wrong, being so majestical,

We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.

We go to gain a little patch of ground

We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,

Weigh what convenience both of time and means

welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are

Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.

Welcome, my good friends.

well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,

well digested in the scenes, set down with as much

We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--

Well may it sort that this portentous figure

We'll put on those shall praise your excellence

We'll put the matter to the present push.--

Well ratified by law and heraldry,

Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--

We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the

Well, we shall sift him.

we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he

We may of their encounter frankly judge

We must with all our majesty and skill

We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,

were better my mother had not borne me: I am

were no sallets in the lines to make the matter

Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.

Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?

were to know himself.

We shall express our duty in his eye;

We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern

We should do when we would; for this "would"

We should profane the service of the dead

We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this

We would not understand what was most fit,

What a piece of work is a man, how noble in

What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,

What company, at what expense; and finding

What does this mean, my lord?

What feast is toward in thine eternal cell

What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank

What, has this thing appeared again tonight?

What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue

What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

What, have you given him any hard words of late?

What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?

What I have said to you.

What is between you? Give me up the truth.

What is he whose grief

What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?

What is the issue of the business there.

What is the matter?

What is the reason that you use me thus?

What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

what it means.

What majesty should be, what duty is,

What might be toward that this sweaty haste

What might you think? No, I went round to work,

what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free

What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,

What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?

What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel

What think you on 't?

What thou hast said to me.

What to ourselves in passion we propose,

What warlike noise is this?

What we have two nights seen.

What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?

What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes

When down her weedy trophies and herself

When he himself might his quietus make

When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,

When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?

When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,

When he the ambitious Norway combated.

When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,

When I had seen this hot love on the wing

When in one line two crafts directly meet.

When in your motion you are hot and dry

When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames

When it proved otherwise?

when I was in the city? Are they so followed?

When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn

When second husband kisses me in bed.

When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport

when she willfully seeks her own salvation?

When sorrows come, they come not single spies,

When that her golden couplets are disclosed,

When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul

When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,

When thou liest howling.

When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,

When we would bring him on to some confession

When yond same star that's westward from the pole

Where, as they had delivered, both in time,

Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your

Where every god did seem to set his seal

wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all

Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.

Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,

Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,

Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.

Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts

Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,

Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?

Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.

Where is your son?

Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,

Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;

Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,

Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;

Where, my lord?

Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,

Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves

Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus

Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,

Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,

Where should we have our thanks?

Where's your father?

Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,

Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?

Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,

Where we shall find him most convenient.

Where you may see the inmost part of you.

Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus

Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,

Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.

Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer

Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,

Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield

Which bewept to the ground did not go

Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,

Which happily foreknowing may avoid,

Which have solicited--the rest is silence.

Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.

Which I have told thee of my father's death.

Which is not tomb enough and continent

Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,

which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should

Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.

Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,

Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason

Which now goes too free-footed.

Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree

Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,

Which was declining on the milky head

Which was the model of that Danish seal;

(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve

which your modesties have not craft enough to

While one with moderate haste might tell a

Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,

Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,

whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods

whipping? Use them after your own honor and

Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"

whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and

whispers

Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no

Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?

Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,

Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,

Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears

Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,

Who is 't that can inform me?

Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;

Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,

Whose blood and judgment are so well

Whose do you think it was?

Whose grave's this, sirrah?

Whose image even but now appeared to us,

whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady

Whose motive in this case should stir me most

Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed

Whose violent property fordoes itself

Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,

Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense

Whose worth, if praises may go back again,

Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,

Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--

Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.

Why day is day, night night, and time is time

Why does the drum come hither?

Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.

Why, how now, Hamlet?

Why, I will fight with him upon this theme

Why, let the strucken deer go weep,

Why, look you there, look how it steals away!

Why, man, they did make love to this employment.

Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of

Why seems it so particular with thee?

Why should we in our peevish opposition

Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task

Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.

Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.

Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.

Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.

Why this same strict and most observant watch

Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,

Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,

Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.

Why to a public count I might not go

Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,

Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"

Why you proceeded not against these feats,

Will be some danger; which for to prevent,

Will bring him to his wonted way again,

will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern

will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of

will more willingly part withal--except my life,

Will not debate the question of this straw.

Will nothing stick our person to arraign

Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,

Will sate itself in a celestial bed

Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,

Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.

Will you be ruled by me?

Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.

Will you two help to hasten them?

wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.

Winner and loser?

wisdom

with

With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,

With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;

With all my heart, and it doth much content me

With all my imperfections on my head.

With all my love I do commend me to you,

With all the strength and armor of the mind

With almost all the holy vows of heaven.

With an attent ear, till I may deliver

With an auspicious and a dropping eye,

With an entreaty, herein further shown,

With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,

With a sore distraction. What I have done

With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head

With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,

with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,

With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus

With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.

With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!

with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me

With heated visage, as against the doom,

With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,

With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,

with him in excellence. But to know a man well

With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,

Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled

Within the book and volume of my brain,

Within the center.

within this month, you shall nose him as you go up

With juice of cursed hebona in a vial

With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword

With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

with me whether you were sent for or no.

With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,

with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as

With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players

with my disposition that this goodly frame, the

Without debatement further, more or less,

Without more motive, into every brain

Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

Without the sensible and true avouch

Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;

With pestilent speeches of his father's death,

with some Attendants.]

With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!

with the body. The King is a thing--

With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought

With this affair along. For all, our thanks.

With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,

With this regard their currents turn awry

With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!

With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?

With true-love showers.

With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

with us, sir.

With us to watch the minutes of this night,

With variable objects, shall expel

With which she followed my poor father's body,

With windlasses and with assays of bias,

With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--

With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,

with you.

with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,

with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with

with you: why do you go about to recover the wind

Witness this army of such mass and charge,

wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three

wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,

Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?

Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear

words are not mine.

Words without thoughts never to heaven go.

word, the word to the action, with this special

work?

work.	[Hurts the King.]

Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,

world to drown or hang themselves more than

worm.

Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--

would,"

would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but

Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,

Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,

Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,

Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven

Would have mourned longer!), married with my

Would have reverted to my bow again,

Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven

would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six

Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not

would not much approve me. Well, sir?

Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the

Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.

would seem to know my stops, you would pluck

Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,

Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.

wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and

yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the

Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

Yea, from the table of my memory

year.

Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,

Yes, faith, heartily.

Yes, it is already garrisoned.

Yet have I in me something dangerous,

Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!

Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,

Yet must not we put the strong law on him.

Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes

Yet now I must confess, that duty done,

Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature

Yet the unshaped use of it doth move

yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man

Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?

Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite

you?

you.

you,

You are the most immediate to our throne,

You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,

You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad

You, as your business and desire shall point you

you both?

you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy

You cannot call it love, for at your age

You cannot speak of reason to the Dane

You come most carefully upon your hour.

you could go backward.

You do not understand yourself so clearly

You do remember all the circumstance?

you down,

You from the Polack wars, and you from England,

You go not till I set you up a glass

You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,

You have been talked of since your travel much,

You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious

You know sometimes he walks four hours together

You know the wager?

You, laying these slight sullies on my son,

you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make

you love me, hold not off.

You mainly were stirred up.

you make of me! You would play upon me, you

You must not put another scandal on him

You must not take for fire. From this time

You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.

You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;

Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,

Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;

young Osric, who brings back to him that you

you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?

You promised me to wed."

Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;

Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,

Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone

your bounty. Take them in.

your clowns speak no more than is set down for

Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.

Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome

Your leave and favor to return to France,

Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this

Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.

your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent

your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would

yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,

Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,

your smiling you seem to say so.

Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.

Your visitation shall receive such thanks

your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no

your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead

Your wisdom best shall think.

you say--

You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,

You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]

you.	[She exits.]

You that look pale and tremble at this chance,

youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near

you, though I know to divide him inventorially

Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?

=============================
		FILE ENDS HERE
============================= 





===============================
		FILE STARTS HERE
===============================
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,

he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

For Hecuba!

POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a

HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a

the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a

lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a

Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a

That beetles o'er his base into the sea,

That looks so many fathoms to the sea

POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a

and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?

chapless and knocked about the mazard with a

most beautified Ophelia--

attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]

[Enter Ophelia.]

[Enter Ophelia.]

HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?

In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia

Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,

Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!

Affront Ophelia.

QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--

Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,

Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?

QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?

KING  Pretty Ophelia--

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

OPHELIA

HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a

While one with moderate haste might tell a

HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A

HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a

This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.

HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a

snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a

HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a

OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a

O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a

OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a

That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a

HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a

HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a

dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a

yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,

And fall a-cursing like a very drab,

Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,

Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,

To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,

Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.

[Enter Osric.]

OSRIC

OSRIC

Come, some music!

POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.

In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--

time. After your death you were better have a bad

And that our drift look through our bad

HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead

The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead

A second time I kill my husband dead

Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,

We should profane the service of the dead

That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.

KING  Dead.

But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.

your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead

her soul, she's dead.

But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

No, no, he is dead.

In the same figure like the King that's dead.

How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.

Fall ten times treble on that cursed head

The source of this our watch, and the chief head

T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head

Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,

With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head

Which was declining on the milky head

With all my imperfections on my head.

head.

head.

He took my father grossly, full of bread,

And, at our more considered time, we'll read,

sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had

But look, the morn in russet mantle clad

You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad

HAMLET  How came he mad?

POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.

QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.

I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.

What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?

And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,

If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd

In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,

Go to thy deathbed.

And therefore must his choice be circumscribed

Will sate itself in a celestial bed

When second husband kisses me in bed.

Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,

closet ere you go to bed.

I'll call upon you ere you go to bed

Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.

Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,

An thou hadst not come to my bed."

Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,

HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced

pronounced.

To be commanded.

Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

Mother, you have my father much offended.

It is offended.

POLONIUS  This business is well ended.

Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,

But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?

As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed

But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed

Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,

OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed

Stick fiery off indeed.

I know him well. He is the brooch indeed

POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.

A combination and a form indeed

morning, 'twas then indeed.

QUEEN  So he does indeed.

That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed

KING  O heavy deed!

Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed

To keep it from divulging, let it feed

eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed

KING  She swoons to see them bleed.

I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed

And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed

Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed

She should in ground unsanctified been lodged

Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,

Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged

'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged

Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;

Her obsequies have been as far enlarged

Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,

Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,

And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,

And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,

And you must needs have heard, how I am punished

ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,

Of his own just remove; the people muddied,

To the unsatisfied.

I did repel his letters and denied

Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,

Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,

Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.

KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--

Now is he total gules, horridly tricked

OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,

Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked

So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,

HORATIO  How was this sealed?

commeddled

Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,

Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,

In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,

To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,

To draw apart the body he hath killed,

Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled

An understanding simple and unschooled.

No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,

LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,

But let this same be presently performed

HORATIO  You might have rhymed.

And carriage of the article designed,

That have a father killed, a mother stained,

To hear him so inclined.

Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,

damned

And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:

them through and through the most fanned

That from her working all his visage wanned,

Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.

Yes, it is already garrisoned.

Was gaged by our king, which had returned

To thine own peace. If he be now returned,

Are joyfully returned.

And, with his head over his shoulder turned,

QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.

GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned

LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.

Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,

Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared

His nephew's levies, which to him appeared

Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,

And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared

Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red

hundred.

Be all my sins remembered.

question of the play be then to be considered.

That I, the son of a dear father murdered,

distempered.

flattered?

A sable silvered.

Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?

Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred

Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,

HAMLET  Pale or red?

The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured

As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured

KING  Part them. They are incensed.

Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,

When that her golden couplets are disclosed,

And with them words of so sweet breath composed

That cannot be, since I am still possessed

well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,

That on the supervise, no leisure bated,

When he the ambitious Norway combated.

[Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]

Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,

Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated

[Enter Ophelia distracted.]

He does confess he feels himself distracted,

With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,

Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,

O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!

ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted

Which now goes too free-footed.

firmament, this majestical roof, fretted

The memory be green, and that it us befitted

fitted.

Or like a creature native and endued

And gather by him, as he is behaved,

By desperate appliance are relieved

O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved

It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved

OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.

deceived.

My father, in his habit as he lived!

But virtue, as it never will be moved,

of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved

LAERTES  He is justly served.

So think thou wilt no second husband wed,

Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,

Not shriving time allowed.

unfellowed.

when I was in the city? Are they so followed?

You promised me to wed."

HAMLET  Safely stowed.

Or that the Everlasting had not fixed

Let in the maid, that out a maid

I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,

Friends both, go join you with some further aid.

they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid

You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;

And, as you said (and wisely was it said),

Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid

Come short of what he did.

HORATIO  My lord, I did,

My honored lord, you know right well you did,

HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did

In dreadful secrecy impart they did,

Which happily foreknowing may avoid,

Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield

them, for they say an old man is twice a child.

But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,

To mine own room again, making so bold

For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,

The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

A little month, or ere those shoes were old

To what I shall unfold.

(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold

All from her father's death, and now behold!

Should have a back or second that might hold

And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,

LAERTES  My will, not all the world.

And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world

offense i' th' world.

Seem to me all the uses of this world!

In the corrupted currents of this world,

which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should

your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would

We should do when we would; for this "would"

That treason can but peep to what it would,

Mark you, your party in converse, him you would

but I cannot choose but weep to think they would

would,"

Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and

Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and

That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and

Have of your audience been most free and

make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and

trade that he will keep out water a great while; and

whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and

And both neglect. What if this cursed hand

LAERTES  Know you the hand?

The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand

But to recover of us, by strong hand

If by direct or by collateral hand

HAMLET  No, by this hand.

Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand

Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.

The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,

So nightly toils the subject of the land,

Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.

And hath shipped me into the land,

Ambassadors to Denmark from England

It must be shortly known to him from England

I cannot live to hear the news from England.

You from the Polack wars, and you from England,

Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England

was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.

HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

HAMLET  For England?

For England.

The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,

England.

HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and

CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.

Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,

CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND

You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,

VOLTEMAND

VOLTEMAND

Th' important acting of your dread command?

No, my good lord, but as you did command

An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,

Put your dread pleasures more into command

A royal knavery--an exact command,

that often madness hits on, which reason and

chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and

monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and

wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and

POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and

whipping? Use them after your own honor and

murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and

responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and

beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and

ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and

Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and

be one man picked out of ten thousand.

I dare damnation. To this point I stand,

Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand

of playing, whose end, both at the first and

HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.

HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and

receive from you. We coted them on the way, and

[Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and

[Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and

my father died. They say he made a good end.

That's the end.

No more--and by a sleep to say we end

For who not needs shall never lack a friend,

For loan oft loses both itself and friend,

And you must put me in your heart for friend,

own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.

REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,

HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend

And each particular hair to stand an end,

Perpend.

I, his sole son, do this same villain send

(As make your bouts more violent to that end)

And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,

Mad as the sea and wind when both contend

The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.

KING  Attend!

Love? His affections do not that way tend;

If circumstances lead me, I will find

And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,

Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind

This bad begins, and worse remains behind.

I must be cruel only to be kind.

A little more than kin and less than kind.

Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.

Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind

That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?

With all the strength and armor of the mind

Take these again, for to the noble mind

'Tis too narrow for your mind.

The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,

Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,

with you: why do you go about to recover the wind

That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound

The single and peculiar life is bound

And, like a man to double business bound,

As it hath used to do, that I have found

He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found

He raised a sigh so piteous and profound

But, better looked into, he truly found

Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round

Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,

It waves you to a more removed ground.

We go to gain a little patch of ground

Millions of acres on us, till our ground,

Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.

HORATIO  Friends to this ground.

HAMLET  Upon what ground?

sound,

His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,

POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?

LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?

HAMLET  O God!

now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,

Form of the thing (each word made true and good),

That to the use of actions fair and good

No med'cine in the world can do thee good.

POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good

Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good

It is not, nor it cannot come to good.

POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.

HAMLET  Good.

HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good

A savageness in unreclaimed blood,

As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,

Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,

Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,

Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.

little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,

Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?

Excitements of my reason and my blood,

Repast them with my blood.

blood

O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,

And that your Grace hath screened and stood

So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood

HAMLET  That's wormwood!

HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--

About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard

Upon a fearful summons. I have heard

Never to speak of this that you have heard.

Our hasty sending. Something have you heard

As did that one, and that, in my regard,

'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,

Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,

He took me by the wrist and held me hard.

Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard

Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.

bastard,

BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?

you could go backward.

A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?

[Enter a Lord.]

A Lord

LAERTES  My dread lord,

GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.

FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?

HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.

MARCELLUS  My good lord.

REYNALDO  But, my good lord--

OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.

Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,

So please you, something touching the Lord

ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.

How is 't, my noble lord?

I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord

O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"

ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.

O, my dear lord--

GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?

morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"

OPHELIA  My lord?

POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

ALL  Armed, my lord.

Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,

ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?

OPHELIA  Good my lord,

A truant disposition, good my lord.

REYNALDO  Good my lord.

HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--

HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.

REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.

What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?

HORATIO  My lord, my lord!

ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?

OPHELIA  At home, my lord.

POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?

QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.

There, my lord.

Where, my lord?

HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.

HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.

HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.

POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.

Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

POLONIUS  I have, my lord.

OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.

MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.

GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?

OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.

REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.

And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,

HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.

POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.

REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.

REYNALDO  Well, my lord.

HORATIO  Well, my lord.

POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.

HORATIO  Very well, my lord.

HAMLET  Very well, my lord.

REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.

REYNALDO  I will, my lord.

What does this mean, my lord?

POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.

GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?

ALL  We do, my lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?

MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!

OPHELIA  No, my lord.

HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.

KING  Thanks, dear my lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.

POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.

meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,

POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?

method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

QUEEN  How fares my lord?

OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.

LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?

OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?

OPHELIA  What is, my lord?

OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.

HORATIO  What news, my lord?

LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?

HORATIO  What's that, my lord?

ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?

HORATIO  It might, my lord.

GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.

HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!

They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?

CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.

Do not, my lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.

POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?

The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.

I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HORATIO  Ay, my lord.

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

LAERTES  Ay, my lord,

GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?

OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.

OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.

lord?

Upon my life, Lamord.

GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word

Than is my deed to my most painted word.

HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.

Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,

With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword

But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword

Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,

[He sheathes his sword.]

And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.

And lay your hands again upon my sword.

Upon my sword.

And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.

Swear by my sword.

Swear by my sword

sword,

I could a tale unfold whose lightest word

So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.

HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.

The ratifiers and props of every word,

But even then the morning cock crew loud,

Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.

know from what part of the world I should be

Resembles that it was. What it should be,

Till then in patience our proceeding be.

Let not the royal bed of Denmark be

now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be

HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be

Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,

To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be

Neither a borrower nor a lender be,

A minist'ring angel shall my sister be

To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be

knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.

Indeed would make one think there might be

QUEEN  If it be,

special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be

To fust in us unused. Now whether it be

Unto that element. But long it could not be

GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be

Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be

But this eternal blazon must not be

HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be

But fall unshaken when they mellow be.

So you will not o'errule me to a peace.

This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,

I have a voice and precedent of peace

For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,

HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?

QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.

He falls to such perusal of my face

Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?

Get you a place.

As they fell out by time, by means, and place,

As he in his particular act and place

It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,

A double blessing is a double grace.

Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,

His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,

He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.

But it reserved some quantity of choice

Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice

If thou hast any sound or use of voice,

On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.

Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.

But even his mother shall uncharge the practice

A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice

Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice

Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,

So by my former lecture and advice

Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,

Break we our watch up, and by my advice

To an exploit, now ripe in my device,

HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.

hither are they coming to offer you service.

O vengeance!

There falling out at tennis"; or perchance

You that look pale and tremble at this chance,

mischance

performance,

HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,

LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance

OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.

As fits a king's remembrance.

My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France

Her brother is in secret come from France,

Your leave and favor to return to France,

I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance

You do remember all the circumstance?

One scene of it comes near the circumstance

Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.

More honored in the breach than the observance.

On such regards of safety and allowance

HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,

It will be laid to us, whose providence

That both the worlds I give to negligence,

Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence

hence

And yet it is almost against my conscience.

conscience.

conscience

And call the noblest to the audience.

Sir, in this audience

patience.

Which have solicited--the rest is silence.

We'll put on those shall praise your excellence

To offer it the show of violence,

Nor shall you do my ear that violence

I pray you pass with your best violence.

And can you by no drift of conference

Be something scanter of your maiden presence.

But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence

That so his sickness, age, and impotence

He closes with you in this consequence:

Each small annexment, petty consequence,

Led by a delicate and tender prince,

Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,

Importing health and graveness. Two months since

HAMLET  How long is that since?

souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;

He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.

To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.

the time gives it proof. I did love you once.

HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.

OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce

And what's in prayer but this twofold force,

[Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made

O, a pit of clay for to be made

The instant burst of clamor that she made

Till of this flat a mountain you have made

The lists, and full proportions are all made

A pickax and a spade, a spade,

And recks not his own rede.

Do you not come your tardy son to chide,

Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,

KING, [aside]

Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]

LAERTES, [aside]

HAMLET, [aside]

Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.

GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.

Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,

Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;

O Gertrude, Gertrude,

HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude

KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.

Gertrude.--

He's loved of the distracted multitude,

A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

I do not set my life at a pin's fee.

fee

For that which thou hast done) must send thee

Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,

Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.

Why seems it so particular with thee?

For what advancement may I hope from thee

Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.

Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,

In this distracted globe. Remember thee?

But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?

old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee

Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--

It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.

I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.

thee.

And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee

O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,

Make mad the guilty and appall the free,

what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free

wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three

[Enter King and two or three.]

Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree

continent of what part a gentleman would see.

HORATIO  What is it you would see?

this line--let me see, let me see:

If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.

An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.

And let all sleep, while to my shame I see

For by the image of my cause I see

Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

To keep those many many bodies safe

That makes calamity of so long life.

own life.

Upon whose property and most dear life

Thrown out his angle for my proper life,

It was as I have seen it in his life,

Should be as mortal as an old man's life?

The serpent that did sting thy father's life

In thee there is not half an hour's life.

Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life

Pursued my life.

With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,

Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,

except my life, except my life.

will more willingly part withal--except my life,

To grunt and sweat under a weary life,

Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,

My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,

If, once a widow, ever I be wife.

murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.

You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,

I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;

And prey on garbage.

Stood challenger on mount of all the age

With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,

His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.

Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.

mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,

How much I had to do to calm his rage!

When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,

By heaven, it is as proper to our age

You cannot call it love, for at your age

Nor the dejected havior of the visage,

('Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage

When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?

To have proved most royal; and for his passage,

He hath not failed to pester us with message

Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,

Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,

[Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]

Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,

The triumph of his pledge.

Good gentlemen, give him a further edge

edge.

And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge

Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.

We may of their encounter frankly judge

Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege

The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.

Of the unworthiest siege.

That even our loves should with our fortunes change;

Or quit in answer of the third exchange,

[Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change

'Tis strange.

O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange

HAMLET  'Tis very strange.

Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,

Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge

Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.

May sweep to my revenge.

revenge.

Witness this army of such mass and charge,

Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.

When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,

And many suchlike ases of great charge,

POLONIUS  What said he?

HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he

and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he

this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)

BARNARDO  He.

we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he

peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he

the men are as mad as he.

KING  But where is he?

branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she

Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she

HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He

And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,

And breath of life, I have no life to breathe

the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the

his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the

money bid for argument unless the poet and the

[Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the

an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the

HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the

[Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the

with my disposition that this goodly frame, the

HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the

now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the

the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the

ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the

it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the

Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the

assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the

HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the

it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the

for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the

OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the

hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the

GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The

or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the

HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the

A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe

OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the

gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the

This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the

[He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the

calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the

of his purchases, and double ones too, than the

HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the

piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the

HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the

yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the

returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The

his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the

HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the

discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the

overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the

question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the

prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the

HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the

rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the

spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the

HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the

have been in continual practice. I shall win at the

very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the

most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the

well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the

condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The

ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the

the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die

Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,

Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,

Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,

With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,

you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make

Therewith fantastic garlands did she make

And he, repelled (a short tale to make),

no better), their writers do them wrong to make

When he himself might his quietus make

Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake

became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like

These hands are not more like.

That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--

how express and admirable; in action how like

QUEEN  It may be, very like.

The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,

KING  The doors are broke.

Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,

The need we have to use you did provoke

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

HAMLET  Or like a whale.

POLONIUS  Very like a whale.

How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.

Nay, very pale.

"I saw him enter such a house of sale"--

most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable

For it is as the air, invulnerable,

As of a man faithful and honorable.

but variable service--two dishes but to one table.

How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable

Be thy intents wicked or charitable,

know not what we may be. God be at your table.

Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--

O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!

HORATIO  Is 't possible?

HAMLET  Is 't possible?

Black as his purpose, did the night resemble

The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble

HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!

uncle,

HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.

I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle

Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?

'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.

Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,

BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,

Season your admiration for a while

As to expend your time with us awhile

I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.

Absent thee from felicity awhile

[Trumpets the while.]

Bestow this place on us a little while.

My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile

Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,

In equal scale weighing delight and dole)

Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?

When yond same star that's westward from the pole

Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole

Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole

That from a shelf the precious diadem stole

HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]

Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple

So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,

Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>

LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle

Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,

They shall go far with little.

pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little

a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.

A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,

that day that our last King Hamlet overcame

And set a double varnish on the fame

That for a fantasy and trick of fame

And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame

Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!

Alack and fie for shame,

By Cock, they are to blame.

I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.

O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,

That hath in it no profit but the name.

That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,

Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name

Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,

sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same

KING  The very same.

Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,

Capitol. Brutus killed me.

And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.

out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me

To reason most absurd, whose common theme

Why, I will fight with him upon this theme

QUEEN  O my son, what theme?

of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me

To speak of horrors--he comes before me.

Can you advise me?

Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.

POLONIUS  What do you think of me?

I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?

I pray you, go with me.

To punish me with this and this with me,

Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time

Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.

All in the morning betime,

own image, and the very age and body of the time

For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,

Where, as they had delivered, both in time,

My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time

take longer time.

QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?

Why day is day, night night, and time is time

If his chief good and market of his time

You must not take for fire. From this time

To keep my name ungored. But till that time

So hallowed and so gracious is that time.

But that I know love is begun by time

HAMLET  In happy time.

Mark me.

LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me

Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.

Who is 't that can inform me?

look upon me,

fret me, you cannot play upon me.

And to the last bended their light on me.

If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,

This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,

HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!

I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!

To let this canker of our nature come

it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,

HAMLET  You are welcome.

Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome

And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.

For her perfections. But my revenge will come.

Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.

I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.

gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.

That, if again this apparition come,

Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,

his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come

Have after. To what issue will this come?

GHOST  My hour is almost come

Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.

For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,

O, here they come.

Come.

Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.

Most welcome home!

Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home

home;

In the most high and palmy state of Rome,

was an actor in Rome--

scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some

What thou hast said to me.

That may to thee do ease and grace to me,

with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me

Speak to me.

Speak to me.

Of his affection to me.

Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me

His access to me.

It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."

What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?

"King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!

LAERTES  Come, one for me.

HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.

Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me

That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me

By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!

And do 't the speedier that you may direct me

With all my heart, and it doth much content me

======================

Have you forgot me?

delights not me"?

To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:

In noise so rude against me?

How all occasions do inform against me

But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me

As made the things more rich. Their perfume

Will you be ruled by me?

QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

me!

I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.

Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,

MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.

You cannot speak of reason to the Dane

Hamlet the Dane.

Have, by the very cunning of the scene,

Scene 2

Scene 3

Scene 1

Scene 7

Scene 4

Scene 4

Scene 6

Scene 1

Scene 2

Scene 4

Scene 1

Scene 2

Scene 2

Scene 5

Scene 1

Scene 3

Scene 3

Scene 2

Scene 1

Scene 5

Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,

The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,

Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,

And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--

Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,

Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.

HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.

He that thou knowest thine,

I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?

I made to her in marriage, and to decline

HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine

To those of mine.

And I do think, or else this brain of mine

breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine

I have a daughter (have while she is mine)

It will be short. The interim's mine,

The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,

HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine

words are not mine.

mine.

eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine

To be your Valentine.

Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.

Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,

ere you had done.

Away, for everything is sealed and done

Must there no more be done?

DOCTOR  No more be done.

Make us again count o'er ere love be done!

If there be any good thing to be done

With a sore distraction. What I have done

ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.

Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.

And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,

QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?

And what's untimely done. ...

Yet now I must confess, that duty done,

He is dead and gone;

Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,

The bell then beating one--

He is gone, he is gone,

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.

Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone

On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone

Now I am alone.

Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone

And in a postscript here, he says "alone."

To you alone.

For nature, crescent, does not grow alone

OTHER  Why, he had none.

I will speak daggers to her, but use none.

From another one?

You are the most immediate to our throne,

HAMLET  One.

ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.

At his heels a stone.

Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,

And a man's life's no more than to say "one."

To you yourself, to us, to everyone.

Singeing his pate against the burning zone,

On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,

The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,

I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.

For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.

foe,

HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?

HAMLET  From top to toe?

LAERTES  O, treble woe

These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

To be contracted in one brow of woe,

man after his desert and who shall 'scape

I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape

Thou com'st in such a questionable shape

Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,

do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?

upon this pipe?

To business with the King more than the scope

An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.

To desperation turn my trust and hope,

For the supply and profit of our hope,

eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are

To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,

by William Shakespeare

HORATIO  Half a share.

HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare

welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are

Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,

that old men have gray beards, that their faces are

players (as it is most like, if their means are

more appear like entertainment than yours. You are

Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware

all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.

But, to my mind, though I am native here

Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.

Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?

And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,

That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,

Is it not monstrous that this player here,

HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?

BARNARDO  'Tis here.

HORATIO  'Tis here.

odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here

Of Jove himself, and now reigns here

HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here

That youth and observation copied there,

modesty as cunning. I remember one said there

Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there

GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There

HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?

KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.

HAMLET  I would I had been there.

It had been so with us, had we been there.

BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?

matter there.

O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!

I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?

BARNARDO  Who's there?

What is the issue of the business there.

Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,

To England send him, or confine him where

LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?

KING  At supper where?

That he, as 'twere by accident, may here

To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,

Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.

Doubt thou the stars are fire,

HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?

And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.

As if it some impartment did desire

(For every man hath business and desire,

Out of the shot and danger of desire.

It is most retrograde to our desire,

Groped I to find out them; had my desire,

Before you visit him, to make inquire

O'er whom his very madness, like some ore

I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.

And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,

Never departed more.

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more

nothing more.

To keep itself from noyance, but much more

HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more

One fair daughter, and no more,

has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.

QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!

QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!

of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more

QUEEN  No more!

LAERTES  Think it no more.

Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.

No more.

his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more

And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.

Makes vow before his uncle never more

Even while men's minds are wild, lest more

more.

But what is your affair in Elsinore?

HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.

I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

Elsinore?

The terms of our estate may not endure

And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,

Well may it sort that this portentous figure

figure?

HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure

Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure

Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.

Have you so slander any moment leisure

cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure

Exposing what is mortal and unsure

Hunts not the trail of policy so sure

For use almost can change the stamp of nature

Making night hideous, and we fools of nature

Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature

Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature

LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,

So criminal and so capital in nature,

That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature

A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,

'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,

A violet in the youth of primy nature,

Among a mineral of metals base,

Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,

We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,

But, like the owner of a foul disease,

They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase

Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,

Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,

HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?

Last, and as much containing as all these,

KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These

Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.

noise?

Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,

For food and diet to some enterprise

Through your dominions for this enterprise,

For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,

When it proved otherwise?

Take this from this, if this be otherwise.

(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),

As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,

O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

herself in her own defense?

For art and exercise in your defense,

But to confront the visage of offense?

May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?

(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,

Or but a sickly part of one true sense

As any the most vulgar thing to sense,

hath the daintier sense.

Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense

Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense

That it be proof and bulwark against sense.

Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those

And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose

The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.

Or with a little shuffling, you may choose

How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!

What to ourselves in passion we propose,

Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.

nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose

Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose

Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.

And to such wondrous doing brought his horse

When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,

OPHELIA  Still better and worse.

In obstinate condolement is a course

And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?

Sure He that made us with such large discourse,

I had my father's signet in my purse,

Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,

Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,

For this effect defective comes by cause.

Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,

That your good beauties be the happy cause

Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,

That I have shot my arrow o'er the house

To tell the secrets of my prison house,

Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,

The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,

There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,

If thou art privy to thy country's fate,

But woe is me! You are so sick of late,

What, have you given him any hard words of late?

'Tis told me he hath very oft of late

And our affairs from England come too late.

It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.

My liege, and madam, to expostulate

GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,

Set your entreatments at a higher rate

Let me be no assistant for a state,

Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.

with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,

Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,

The safety and the health of this whole state.

Of his true state.

So far from cheer and from your former state,

Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,

This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

(As it doth well appear unto our state)

Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite

The time is out of joint. O cursed spite

As of a father; for let the world take note,

As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,

Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note

Th' effect of what I wrote?

The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.

Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste

What might be toward that this sweaty haste

For the demand of our neglected tribute.

The pith and marrow of our attribute.

The perfume and suppliance of a minute,

HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague

Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,

Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,

Give it an understanding but no tongue.

What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue

But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

[Enter Prologue.]

PROLOGUE

GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!

This above all: to thine own self be true,

KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!

As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.

HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!

POLONIUS  'Tis most true,

Collected from all simples that have virtue

HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue

To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,

Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.

LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.

something. Where did I leave?

Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave

old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave

QUEEN  What would she have?

And makes us rather bear those ills we have

My lord, I have.

hold their course for England; of them I have

more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have

'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have

HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have

Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,

to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have

GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have

Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--

But he's an arrant knave.

Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,

LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]

There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave

[Leaps in the grave.]

OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave

To outface me with leaping in her grave?

Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,

And not have strewed thy grave.

HAMLET  Into my grave?

It shall do well. But yet do I believe

Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe

Before my God, I might not this believe

(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve

blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,

a thousand pound. Didst perceive?

They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,

And thy commandment all alone shall live

HAMLET  Nay, but to live

epitaph than their ill report while you live.

Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive

I could not but by her. The other motive

Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,

HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.

Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:

Anon, as patient as the female dove

Fare you well, my dove.

To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,

In youth when I did love, did love,

I do receive your offered love like love

Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.

There lives within the very flame of love

Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.

As meditation or the thoughts of love,

This is the very ecstasy of love,

And with no less nobility of love

Could not with all their quantity of love

Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love

My lord, he hath importuned me with love

But never doubt I love.

If thou didst ever thy dear father love--

More grief to hide than hate to utter love.

This mad young man. But so much was our love,

HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,

KING  But how hath she received his love?

awhile but in the end accepts his love.]

HAMLET  As woman's love.

From the fair forehead of an innocent love

For women fear too much, even as they love,

Mad for thy love?

The instances that second marriage move

Doubt that the sun doth move,

Yet the unshaped use of it doth move

move

For 'tis a question left us yet to prove

As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.

After the Danish sword, and thy free awe

O, that that earth which kept the world in awe

There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we

As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we

GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.

him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We

No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,

Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!

With an auspicious and a dropping eye,

He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,

Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,

As day does to your eye.

A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.

We shall express our duty in his eye;

And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.

I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,

No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;

mischief.

What is he whose grief

Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,

Laertes, I must commune with your grief,

The origin and commencement of his grief

Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.

By his cockle hat and staff

Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff

My head should be struck off.

[Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]

Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,

[A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]

ordnance are shot off.]

you love me, hold not off.

If it be made of penetrable stuff,

once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if

HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If

hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half

And live the purer with the other half!

Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,

So much from th' understanding of himself

The devil himself.

were to know himself.

It is a poison tempered by himself.

When down her weedy trophies and herself

I loved your father, and we love ourself,

Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

Observe his inclination in yourself.

Given private time to you, and you yourself

And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself

It sends some precious instance of itself

Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself

Being a thing immortal as itself?

Whose violent property fordoes itself

With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.

HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.

purpose, confess thyself--

thyself,

Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,

else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself

Must render up myself.

How strange or odd some'er I bear myself

Lives almost by his looks, and for myself

Horatio--or I do forget myself!

That to Laertes I forgot myself,

Behind the arras I'll convey myself

HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of

How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of

HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of

Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of

Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of

HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of

plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of

head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of

[They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of

HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of

But with a crafty madness keeps aloof

And that I see, in passages of proof,

have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of

thereabout of it especially when he speaks of

will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of

having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of

the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of

Than fly to others that we know not of?

HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of

Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of

embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of

lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of

HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of

observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of

That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,

At his head a grass-green turf,

Until my eyelids will no longer wag!

That he could nothing do but wish and beg

Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,

And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,

HAMLET, [advancing]

reading.

I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

What company, at what expense; and finding

agreeing,

Confederate season, else no creature seeing,

excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging

with the body. The King is a thing--

HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing

More relative than this. The play's the thing

at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

Or is it some abuse and no such thing?

Did nothing.

BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.

With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!

That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,

As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,

HAMLET  Nothing.

And then it started like a guilty thing

There's such divinity doth hedge a king

replication should be made by the son of a king?

As kill a king?

Even in their promise as it is a-making,

sings in grave-making.

And can say nothing--no, not for a king

This man shall set me packing.

They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"

Comes armed through our watch so like the king

MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?

There is a play tonight before the King.

BARNARDO  Long live the King!

Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.

Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.

An earnest conjuration from the King,

To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.

body is and go with us to the King.

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.

But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,

work.	[Hurts the King.]

HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?

vile king,

Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.

[Enter King.]

PLAYER KING

PLAYER KING

PLAYER KING

PLAYER KING

As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,

That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?

"Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"

Both to my God and to my gracious king,

At least the whisper goes so: our last king,

I saw him once. He was a goodly king.

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=======

=====

=====

=====

=====

=====

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

KING

them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling

When thou liest howling.

In censure of his seeming.

I hear him coming.

HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?

Awake the god of day, and at his warning,

His silence will sit drooping.

A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,

The ears are senseless that should give us hearing

Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing

POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,

HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?

The canker galls the infants of the spring

FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.

HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing

KING, [rising]

Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.

Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting

A broken voice, and his whole function suiting

Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,

And sure I am two men there is not living

Most generous, and free from all contriving,

reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving

When I had seen this hot love on the wing

differences, of very soft society and great showing.

GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing

If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing

Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,

if I could see the puppets dallying.

Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying

Therefore I have entreated him along

POLONIUS  This is too long.

This bird of dawning singeth all night long;

HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?

Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;

Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung

Believe so much in him that he is young,

our withers are unwrung.

But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

In going back to school in Wittenberg,

I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.

HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?

Whose grave's this, sirrah?

And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,

And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,

Do not itself unkennel in one speech,

quality. Come, a passionate speech.

night's speech.

(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),

I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,

I have seen myself, and served against, the French,

lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch

If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

Craves the conveyance of a promised march

Appears before them and with solemn march

And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch

LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.

Out of his subject; and we here dispatch

I your commission will forthwith dispatch,

And I with them the third night kept the watch,

My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,

With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

Why this same strict and most observant watch

Hath clawed me in his clutch,

A baseness to write fair, and labored much

for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much

You have been talked of since your travel much,

well digested in the scenes, set down with as much

method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,

The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch

Without the sensible and true avouch

ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such

As if I had never been such.

received it, and others whose judgments in such

of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh

And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,

part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh

tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,

thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh

crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,

The chariest maid is prodigal enough

That swift as quicksilver it courses through

A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!

Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash

For though I am not splenitive and rash,

And from her fair and unpolluted flesh

[Sound a flourish.]

As love between them like the palm might flourish,

And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish

Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;

poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh

Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?

We'll put the matter to the present push.--

This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,

It may be death.

Under the moon, can save the thing from death

He should those bearers put to sudden death,

Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,

For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,

But that the dread of something after death,

He never gave commandment for their death.

O wretched state! O bosom black as death!

That I am guiltless of your father's death

With pestilent speeches of his father's death,

Which I have told thee of my father's death.

Or thinking by our late dear brother's death

Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death

Gives me superfluous death.

Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,

To muddy death.

Is by a forged process of my death

And hears it roar beneath.

Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,

Be thou assured, if words be made of breath

QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--

The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,

gentleman in our more rawer breath?

ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath

That I shall live and tell him to his teeth

This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.

POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'

How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.

for your dull ass will not mend his pace with

And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with

with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with

[Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with

[Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with

with

Here's to thy health.

Than I to Hercules. Within a month,

By what it fed on. And yet, within a month

Giving more light than heat, extinct in both

I do not fear it; I have seen you both.

I cannot dream of. I entreat you both

you both?

Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,

As the indifferent children of the earth.

Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,

returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth

fashion i' th' earth?

LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,

body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth

The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,

Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,

"This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth

For he himself is subject to his birth.

To hide the slain? O, from this time forth

I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth

My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!

Holding a weak supposal of our worth

The hand more instrumental to the mouth,

Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,

it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth

mouth,

Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,

A very ribbon in the cap of youth--

And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,

That unmatched form and stature of blown youth

What is between you? Give me up the truth.

Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;

my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I

HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I

HAMLET  A whole one, I.

OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I

sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I

HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I

Be buried quick with her, and so will I.

O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!

Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I

HORATIO  That can I.

HAMLET  Who, I?

horses, against the which he has impawned, as I

bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I

'twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I

matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I

Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,

HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I

a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I

though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I

The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,

more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I

HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.

And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'

A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak

Itself to motion, like as it would speak;

And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:

Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!

For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak

Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.

Of that I shall have also cause to speak,

O, speak!

But from what cause he will by no means speak.

And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,

I do believe you think what now you speak,

KING  Why, now you speak

speak.

speak.

But what we do determine oft we break.

What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?

QUEEN  Alack,

And that his soul may be as damned and black

Nor customary suits of solemn black,

HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,

So levied as before, against the Polack,

To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,

Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.

It faded on the crowing of the cock.

A very very--pajock.

would seem to know my stops, you would pluck

MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.

So bloodily hast struck?

If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,

Does not divide the Sunday from the week.

And with a larger tether may he walk

Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.

And curd, like eager droppings into milk,

As it did seem to shatter all his bulk

I bought an unction of a mountebank

As level as the cannon to his blank

What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank

I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

How say you, then? Would heart of man once think

Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,

Your wisdom best shall think.

Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think

I would fain prove so. But what might you think,

Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,

KING  Gertrude, do not drink.

[Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]

If I had played the desk or table-book

book,

Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?

There is a willow grows askant the brook

And, in this upshot, purposes mistook

My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark

Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,

HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.

In which the majesty of buried Denmark

Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark

Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?

There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark

At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.

And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.

From whence though willingly I came to Denmark

Denmark.

Denmark?

OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.

OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.

Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,

What might you think? No, I went round to work,

And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,

work?

Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task

tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,

historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,

We do it wrong, being so majestical,

To his own scandal.

Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,

Which was the model of that Danish seal;

Where every god did seem to set his seal

As e'er my conversation coped withal.

Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.

And for your rapier most especial,

word, the word to the action, with this special

in trial.

Of bell and burial.

GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,

Christian burial.

Christian burial.

With juice of cursed hebona in a vial

AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,

His means of death, his obscure funeral

My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,

But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.

Let me be cruel, not unnatural.

Look where he goes even now out at the portal!

Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual

One woe doth tread upon another's heel,

Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,

What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel

That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,

Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel

Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,

shape of a camel?

And bear it to the chapel.

With variable objects, shall expel

was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?

POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.

HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.

May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,

The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,

When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,

of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?

Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil

To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!

From that particular fault. The dram of evil

In further evil?

But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call

wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all

To be forestalled ere we come to fall,

BARNARDO  Last night of all,

And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall

Under the which he shall not choose but fall;

And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.

But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall

shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall

cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall

And let me wring your heart; for so I shall

That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,

knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall

man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall

KING  So you shall,

cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.

He was a man. Take him for all in all,

His liberty is full of threats to all--

The better to beguile. This is for all:

Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,

Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,

And so, without more circumstance at all,

(Unless things mortal move them not at all)

Or not at all.

Madam, I swear I use no art at all.

And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,

What feast is toward in thine eternal cell

A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,

Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,

As if he had been loosed out of hell

Rebellious hell,

hell,

But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,

OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.

about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell

OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.

Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell

like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll

My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.

much to tell thee. Farewell.

play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.

Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.

quickly too. Farewell.

QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!

Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.

We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.

The which he loved passing well.

daughter that I love passing well.

with him in excellence. But to know a man well

HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well

Whose blood and judgment are so well

And for my means, I'll husband them so well

Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well

I will bestow him and will answer well

KING  It likes us well,

Our indiscretion sometime serves us well

My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.

"And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.

HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--

HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.

I will requite your loves. So fare you well.

POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.

QUEEN  Did he receive you well?

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.

KING  Let him demand his fill.

Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.

New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,

We must with all our majesty and skill

utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.

A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,

Let it be tenable in your silence still;

And nothing is at a like goodness still;

To show us so much gentry and goodwill

No traveler returns, puzzles the will

nature will.

HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.

ALL  We will, we will.

Rough-hew them how we will--

HAMLET  I will.

HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will

[Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will

Though inclination be as sharp as will.

And reason panders will.

(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will

HORATIO  I warrant it will.

Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,

pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will

And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--

All flaxen was his poll.

That we are made of stuff so flat and dull

Of unimproved mettle hot and full,

recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full

Our sovereign process, which imports at full,

[He digs up a skull.]

Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.

Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl

Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.

HAMLET  O, wonderful!

As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,

And my imaginations are as foul

The inward service of the mind and soul

She is so conjunctive to my life and soul

When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul

O, step between her and her fighting soul.

And we shall jointly labor with your soul

Lay not that flattering unction to your soul

To take him in the purging of his soul,

Was not like madness. There's something in his soul

God 'a mercy on his soul.

The devil take thy soul!

Even with the very comment of thy soul

I hold my duty as I hold my soul,

Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,

HAMLET  Good madam.

I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam

the shadow of a dream.

That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.

were better my mother had not borne me: I am

Now falls on Priam.

That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"

This sudden sending him away must seem

a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.

But not where I have aimed them.

They were given me by Claudio. He received them

You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.

journeymen had made men, and not made them

I pray you now receive them.

Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?

Will you two help to hasten them?

That for some vicious mole of nature in them,

KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?

Of him that brought them.

To him from whom you brought them.

at my beck than I have thoughts to put them

them.--

them.

them,

HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?

And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.

(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)

We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,

This night to play before him.

OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!

HORATIO  Heavens secure him!

HORATIO  I did very well note him.

And will not let belief take hold of him

HORATIO  A piece of him.

Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,

HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?

OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

To show his grief. Let her be round with him;

Pray you, be round with him.

That, being of so young days brought up with him

does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him

No more to undertake it, I will work him

We cannot get from him.

Did not together pluck such envy from him

Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him

That we with wisest sorrow think on him

And thus awhile the fit will work on him.

You must not put another scandal on him

I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.

Addicted so and so." And there put on him

Yet must not we put the strong law on him.

he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him

He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.

This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.

Pleasant and helpful to him!

At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.

Is the great love the general gender bear him,

QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.

That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him

To our most valiant brother--so much for him.

Speak loudly for him.

REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.

FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him

Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him

Well, we shall sift him.

More than his father's death, that thus hath put him

MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.

To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him

But not by him.

Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.

him

To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom

I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,

wisdom

With heated visage, as against the doom,

I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.

MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from

Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from

The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.

And to the manner born, it is a custom

HORATIO  Is it a custom?

At last, a little shaking of mine arm,

No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,

And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,

Then goes he to the length of all his arm,

In filial obligation for some term

Together with that fair and warlike form

And there assume some other horrible form

The glass of fashion and the mold of form,

But as we often see against some storm

worm.

Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,

the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can

And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,

King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.

GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can

Call me what instrument you will, though you can

King best service in the end. He keeps them like an

rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an

So much as from occasion you may glean,

To cast thee up again. What may this mean

That I might be the organ.

transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than

world to drown or hang themselves more than

GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than

To give the world assurance of a man.

And spur my dull revenge. What is a man

HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,

HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.

Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man

HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man

The unseen good old man.

Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man

For the apparel oft proclaims the man,

[Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]

OTHER  Was he a gentleman?

ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.

or so," and "gentleman."

He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.

Like a good child and a true gentleman.

"Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"

this gentleman?

GENTLEMAN

Holds such an enmity with blood of man

Speak, man.

gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.

(Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),

O most pernicious woman!

KING  A Norman.

To sound what stop she please. Give me that man

yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man

Thou canst not then be false to any man.

And we cast away moan.

Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

Shall I strike it with my partisan?

pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden

Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden

O heavy burden!

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been

About the world have times twelve thirties been

OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been

Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been

galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been

And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen

OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

It is a damned ghost that we have seen,

I know my course. The spirit that I have seen

Never to speak of this that you have seen,

Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,

What we have two nights seen.

need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen

But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--

HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?

[Enter the Player King and Queen.]

poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen

These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.

How does the Queen?

[Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen

[Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,

[Enter Queen.]

PLAYER QUEEN

PLAYER QUEEN

PLAYER QUEEN

Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,

The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.

My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

QUEEN

between

When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,

KING  Will you know them, then?

HAMLET  What woman then?

But if the gods themselves did see her then

[To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.

a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,

give you some violets, but they withered all when

OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when

And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken

How now, what hath befallen?

QUEEN  Ay, amen!

The imminent death of twenty thousand men

Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.

Two nights together had these gentlemen,

Upon the witness of these gentlemen

ALL  Gentlemen!

Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,

Come hither, gentlemen,

POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.

Gentlemen

The form of plausive manners--that these men,

So oft it chances in particular men

these are the only men.

Unto our climatures and countrymen.

Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open

On plots and errors happen.

And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.

Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,

And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven

That he might not beteem the winds of heaven

Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven

With almost all the holy vows of heaven.

Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven

Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven

Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,

Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven

And so he goes to heaven,

O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;

It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,

Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,

Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,

To heaven.

As oft as any passions under heaven

Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,

Not I, my lord, by heaven.

Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!

But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen

Will nothing stick our person to arraign

I shall not look upon his like again.

He never will come again.

And will he not come again?

And will he not come again?

HAMLET  Nay, come again.

Whose worth, if praises may go back again,

Perchance 'twill walk again.

LAERTES  Well, again.

Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.

But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!

And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,

Now fear I this will give it start again.

Would have reverted to my bow again,

GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again

Will bring him to his wonted way again,

shall be dry again.

HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,

That one may smile and smile and be a villain.

O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!

With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!

villain!

O, I am slain!

That he which hath your noble father slain

But in battalions: first, her father slain;

Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,

It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.

I doubt it is no other but the main--

And we beseech you, bend you to remain

And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain

This is the very coinage of your brain.

PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,

Within the book and volume of my brain,

Without more motive, into every brain

CAPTAIN

CAPTAIN

CAPTAIN

certain.

Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain

O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!

And never come mischance between us twain.

HAMLET  Up from my cabin,

back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in

What a piece of work is a man, how noble in

[A noise within:] "Let her come in!"

ALL  No, let's come in!

To his confine, and of the truth herein

"Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.

And, as the world were now but to begin,

Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.

HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,

I stand in pause where I shall first begin

Since nature cannot choose his origin),

Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,

Is very cunning in.

[A noise within.]

[A noise within.]

[March within.]

Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,

[A march afar off and shot within.]

as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in

Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

your bounty. Take them in.

Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.

name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in

voice of the King himself for your succession in

HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in

And, after, we will both our judgments join

dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in

Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,

ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in

HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in

Our son shall win.

Such was the very armor he had on

I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.

And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

Give us the foils. Come on.

And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,

And prologue to the omen coming on,

POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on

In honorable fashion--

the play, I remember, pleased not the million:

Gravedigger's companion

But in the gross and scope of mine opinion

ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,

Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,

Into a tow'ring passion.

Had he the motive and the cue for passion

them exclaim against their own succession?

When we would bring him on to some confession

grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.

Get from him why he puts on this confusion,

I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!

This present object made probation.

That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation

And gem of all the nation.

He waxes desperate with imagination.

I have in quick determination

To show my duty in your coronation,

nation

HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation

The very place puts toys of desperation,

struck her into amazement and admiration.

Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?

GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation

No noble rite nor formal ostentation)

And they in France of the best rank and station

OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation

when she willfully seeks her own salvation?

means of the late innovation.

MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action

Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,

And keep you in the rear of your affection,

And could of men distinguish, her election

accent and good discretion.

GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,

That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition

According to the phrase or the addition

Truly to speak, and with no addition,

Why should we in our peevish opposition

So horridly to shake our disposition

But with much forcing of his disposition.

That might your nature, honor, and exception

Shall in the general censure take corruption

player went to cuffs in the question.

To be or not to be--that is the question:

By this encompassment and drift of question

That I must call 't in question.

beating. And, when you are asked this question

But since, so jump upon this bloody question,

And thus the native hue of resolution

By the o'ergrowth of some complexion

my complexion.

afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common

For what we know must be and is as common

Ay, madam, it is common.

flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon

And why such daily cast of brazen cannon

To put an antic disposition on)

Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on

ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on

And his sandal shoon.

So many journeys may the sun and moon

Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,

If she unmask her beauty to the moon.

My custom always of the afternoon,

HAMLET  What's his weapon?

Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.

Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--

That capability and godlike reason

(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason

(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),

Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason

Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,

ALL  Treason, treason!

reason.

Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season

Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,

[Forcing him to drink the poison.]

so. To me, it is a prison.

HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.

Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.

OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person

If it assume my noble father's person,

Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--

Where is your son?

Than that which dearest father bears his son

To show yourself indeed your father's son

But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--

You, laying these slight sullies on my son,

On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.

us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on

For he was likely, had he been put on,

And from his mouth whose voice will draw on

When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn

We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern

[Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]

will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern

Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]

Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!

Guildenstern.]

GUILDENSTERN

GUILDENSTERN

GUILDENSTERN

GUILDENSTERN

GUILDENSTERN

The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,

Since frost itself as actively doth burn,

The undiscovered country from whose bourn

commandment. If not, your pardon and my return

turn.

But, orderly to end where I begun:

Our wills and fates do so contrary run

Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.

"So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,

And thrice his head thus waving up and down,

They had begun the play. I sat me down,

Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!

HORATIO  Well, sit we down,

LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.

And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,

And break your own neck down.

HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]

As therein are set down.

My tables--meet it is I set it down

you down,

With an entreaty, herein further shown,

Antiquity forgot, custom not known,

As are companions noted and most known

Now wears his crown.

As if increase of appetite had grown

Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown

O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!

That our devices still are overthrown;

Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.

HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own

His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,

'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

FRANCISCO

Dies in his own too-much. That we would do

That he should weep for her? What would he do

Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?

QUEEN  What shall I do?

You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,

[Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]

Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?

REYNALDO

My operant powers their functions leave to do.

My stern effects. Then what I have to do

And let them know both what we mean to do

Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"

MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.

[Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]

FRANCISCO  Barnardo?

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

BARNARDO

He may not, as unvalued persons do,

Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,

I once did hold it, as our statists do,

HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.

Not this by no means that I bid you do:

Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do

wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'

you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?

Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.

And end his being. That done, he lets me go,

Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,

Words without thoughts never to heaven go.

I do beseech you give him leave to go.

As infinite as man may undergo,

But let that go.

Which bewept to the ground did not go

Be ruled. You shall not go.

Why to a public count I might not go

OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!

Oh, ho!

Help, ho!

HAMLET  Between who?

HAMLET  Saw who?

[Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]

Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,

But I am very sorry, good Horatio,

HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!

HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.

And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--

There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,

HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!

HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]

MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]

[Enter Horatio.]

Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,

Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.

MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.

Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HORATIO

HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?

them to controversy. There was for a while no

KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no

your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no

Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no

HAMLET  How if I answer no?

If 't be th' affliction of his love or no

with me whether you were sent for or no.

LAERTES  No.

their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no

HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No

No.

and his load too.

HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.

thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too

Importing Denmark's health and England's too,

HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.

KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,

Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.

OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.

KING  It shall be so.

LAERTES  Let this be so.

Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,

As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.

OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

HORATIO  E'en so.

I think it be no other but e'en so.

OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?

Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?

fashion and so berattle the common stages (so

beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,

And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:

That I have positively said "'Tis so,"

capons so.

That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so

I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so

If damned custom have not brazed it so

The rather if you could devise it so

HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.

OPHELIA  No more but so?

And let him know so.

POLONIUS  I will say so.

your smiling you seem to say so.

I would not hear your enemy say so,

so.

It would be spoke to.

ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to

naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to

which your modesties have not craft enough to

OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to

thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to

poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to

and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to

to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to

GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into

good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to

Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!

OTHER  Go to!

now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to

art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O

HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to

tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to

HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to

songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to

a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'

for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two

rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two

my mother looks, and my father died within 's two

But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.

HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?

I shall the effect of this good lesson keep

keep,

Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--

And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--

And convey is assistant, do not sleep,

For some must watch, while some must sleep:

Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,

To try conclusions, in the basket creep

Why, let the strucken deer go weep,

HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.

OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.

OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?

my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!

The bark is ready, and the wind at help,

No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp

Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top

Unpeg the basket on the house's top,

Give him the cup.

[He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]

Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]

[She lifts the cup.]

You mainly were stirred up.

Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.

within this month, you shall nose him as you go up

And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,

O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--

Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear

With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,

Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear

For thou dost know, O Damon dear,

And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear

All given to mine ear.

HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?

Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;

Almost to jelly with the act of fear,

Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.

For we will fetters put about this fear,

The virtue of his will; but you must fear,

Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,

HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!

HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?

KING  Laertes, you shall hear

HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.

O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.

Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear

foolish ear.

Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.

So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?

How these things came about. So shall you hear

The glowworm shows the matin to be near

Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near

Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.

It shall as level to your judgment 'pear

And wants not buzzers to infect his ear

And in his grave rained many a tear.

Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear

As peace should still her wheaten garland wear

GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

That you know aught of me--this do swear,

Consent to swear.

may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear

year.

Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.

progress through the guts of a beggar.

Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.

Doubt truth to be a liar,

both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar

Being nature's livery or fortune's star,

Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,

"Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.

The soldier's music and the rite of war

And foreign mart for implements of war,

Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.

That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:

HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider

thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander

Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder

KING  Pluck them asunder.

And, but that great command o'ersways the order,

And, as I think, they have already order

Of those effects for which I did the murder:

Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?

HAMLET  Murder?

'twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!

Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer

You know the wager?

bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager

OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.

Gravedigger

Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.

That we can let our beard be shook with danger

A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

[Enter a Messenger.]

HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger

MESSENGER

That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger

BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.

HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.

HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer

Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,

This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,

QUEEN  I will not speak with her.

ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her

nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her

QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?

To sing a requiem and such rest to her

Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her

But you must know your father lost a father,

KING  Conceit upon her father.

Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,

Not that I think you did not love your father,

My lord, the King your father.

To give these mourning duties to your father.

Requite him for your father.

Where's your father?

The apparition comes. I knew your father;

Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.

My father--methinks I see my father.

My father's brother, but no more like my father

Give me my father!

Play something like the murder of my father

HAMLET  The King my father?

Most throughly for my father.

LAERTES  Where is my father?

To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather

God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,

Nay, come, let's go together.

You know sometimes he walks four hours together

Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.

together

GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.

highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither

Why does the drum come hither?

Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?

For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,

of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.

HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,

Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other

So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.

Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,

Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,

find him not there, seek him i' th' other

HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!

'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,

A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,

'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,

Of my true mother.

Farewell, dear mother.

HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!

HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.

But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother

Good night, mother.

He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,

And (would it were not so) you are my mother.

Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--

Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother

Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.

Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,

shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.

[Enter Gravedigger and Another.]

This is too heavy. Let me see another.

HAMLET  Why he more than another?

HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another

digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another

That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other

LAERTES, her brother

As kill a king and marry with his brother.

As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,

And hurt my brother.

May give his saying deed, which is no further

KING  How may we try it further?

further.

her.

They bore him barefaced on the bier,

[He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier

Or for some frontier?

[Enter Osric, a courtier.]

grave-maker?

GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.

choler.

For 'tis the sport to have the enginer

HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner

And pious action we do sugar o'er

[Giving them a paper.]

[Handing him a paper.]

[He gives a paper.]

The head and source of all your son's distemper.

Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper

HAMLET  At supper.

That they do know my son, come you more nearer

Winner and loser?

GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;

Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,

all after!

Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,

POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.

daughter.

daughter?

Within the center.

or a carpenter?"

either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

King's jester.

That I must be their scourge and minister.

Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,

[Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]

HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,

And, like a neutral to his will and matter,

To hear and see the matter.

were no sallets in the lines to make the matter

on your head. Sir, this is the matter--

What is the matter?

How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?

HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?

LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.

I loved you ever. But it is no matter.

about my heart. But it is no matter.

love, and by what more dear a better

am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]

SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter

[He reads the letter.]

To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever

The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.

O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever

That I have longed long to redeliver.

With an attent ear, till I may deliver

Truly deliver.

OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--

O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power

May be a devil, and the devil hath power

Giving to you no further personal power

In general synod take away her power,

Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.

FIRST PLAYER

FIRST PLAYER

My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer

town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air

affair.

Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--

HAMLET  Are you fair?

But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.

It is a nipping and an eager air.

Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,

If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their

take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their

Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their

POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their

Barbary horses against six French swords, their

OSRIC  Sir?

Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,

LAERTES  You mock me, sir.

GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.

GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--

wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,

HAMLET  With drink, sir?

would not much approve me. Well, sir?

HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?

HAMLET  Of him, sir.

GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.

even, sir.--

HAMLET  Come on, sir.

with us, sir.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.

Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.

Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,

HAMLET  Hear you, sir,

SAILOR  God bless you, sir.

God bless you, sir.

CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.

Behind the arras hearing something stir,

Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.

Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or

tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or

HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for

was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for

I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for

exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for

And all we mourn for.

your clowns speak no more than is set down for

hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for

POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for

That thus he suffers for.

HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.

color. I know the good king and queen have sent for

are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?

HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for

begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for

Next, your son gone, and he most violent author

And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,

Of his behavior.

Mother, good night indeed. This counselor

That show of such an exercise may color

To my revenge; but in my terms of honor

Till by some elder masters of known honor

As it behooves my daughter and your honor.

ALL  Our duty to your Honor.

PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.

POLONIUS  Upon my honor--

poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor

Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

And dupped the chamber door,

Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor

HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor

Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.

good actor.

DOCTOR

stoup of liquor.

For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,

Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or

Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,

Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,

You come most carefully upon your hour.

And in the porches of my ears did pour

nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your

attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your

have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your

see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your

HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your

set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your

distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your

Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your

ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as

for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as

With windlasses and with assays of bias,

KING  Alas, alas!

Tell him that by his license Fortinbras

To the inheritance of Fortinbras

To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,

His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,

Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,

The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.

Fortinbras.

FORTINBRAS

FORTINBRAS

[He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]

[Polonius hides behind the arras.]

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]

through the arras.]

with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as

This realm dismantled was

for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was

It came to pass, as most like it was--

Whose do you think it was?

GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.

OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as

In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,

vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]

Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads

But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.

And do not spread the compost on the weeds

Than settled age his sables and his weeds,

There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds

HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'

Do not forever with thy vailed lids

It is our trick; nature her custom holds,

ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's

Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands

HAMLET  Hold off your hands.

And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands

Importing the surrender of those lands

Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands

Niggard of question, but of our demands

Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,

As low as to the fiends!

A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,

Welcome, my good friends.

mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,

As thus: "I know his father and his friends

Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends

friends.

Carve for himself, for on his choice depends

There's a divinity that shapes our ends,

Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds

And passion in the gods.

Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods

whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods

A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards

I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,

Guildenstern, and Lords.]

Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words

HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words

More than in words?

HAMLET  Words, words, words.

Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,

Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,

Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,

Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds

Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places

Heavens make our presence and our practices

assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--

HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?

For like the hectic in my blood he rages,

HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages

changes

torches.]

HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--

laid on him by them, in his meed he's

And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,

When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes

Then up he rose and donned his clothes

The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]

Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]

Follow my mother.	[King dies.]

Are here arrived, give order that these bodies

O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]

Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies

The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;

There is no shuffling; there the action lies

The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.

LAERTES  None but his enemies.

Some little time, so by your companies

Being thus benetted round with villainies,

When sorrows come, they come not single spies,

encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries

Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,

And stand a comma 'tween their amities,

ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties

And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties

His further gait herein, in that the levies,

next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes

The very soul, and sweet religion makes

Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes

That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,

Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.

Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.

Or to take arms against a sea of troubles

Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles

Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules

Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames

When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames

Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes

For, in the fatness of these pursy times,

"Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes

Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes

'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes

But look where sadly the poor wretch comes

Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes

I stay too long. But here my father comes.

HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.

more, for look where my abridgment comes.

OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.

HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,

But I will delve one yard below their mines

(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,

If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,

His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,

gallows does well. But how does it well? It does

Popped in between th' election and my hopes,

On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.

spheres,

months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's

And for the day confined to fast in fires

Most fair return of greetings and desires.

bellowed that I have thought some of nature's

OPHELIA  The King rises.

[Claudius rises.]

very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses

So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.

And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses

As harbingers preceding still the fates

I should have fatted all the region kites

My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:

[He writes.]

Of mighty opposites.

KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!

So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.

foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]

[Enter King and Laertes.]

KING  Good Laertes,

Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,

QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.

OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes

Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,

KING  What is the cause, Laertes,

What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

OSRIC  Of Laertes?

And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,

Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,

KING  If it be so, Laertes

HAMLET, [to Laertes]

rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]

You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?

OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?

Laertes,

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

LAERTES

Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes

be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,

Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues

There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves

readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves

between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves

Into the madness wherein now he raves

To th' ambassadors of England gives

them, for there be of them that will themselves

Together with remembrance of ourselves.

fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves

QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.

Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves

After the thing it loves.

In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,

Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,

By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes

Of mine own eyes.

Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;

He seemed to find his way without his eyes,

And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?

Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?

eyes.

legs.

To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things

And leads the will to desperate undertakings

Richer than that which four successive kings

Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,

We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--

O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs

OPHELIA [sings]

OPHELIA [sings]

OPHELIA [sings]

OPHELIA [sings]

and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]

And more above, hath his solicitings,

Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,

If with too credent ear you list his songs

O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!

HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs

HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is

POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.

the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is

each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is

HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is

POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is

[Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),

land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his

not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his

HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his

HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his

HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His

If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his

HORATIO  Not from his

jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his

HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his

the force of honesty can translate beauty into his

protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his

as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his

In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,

As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?

To make oppression bitter, or ere this

As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--

And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

KING  Let's further think of this,

But is there no sequel at the heels of this

Now out of this--

QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?

and there is much music, excellent voice, in this

pity that great folk should have count'nance in this

Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this

Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.

Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,

We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this

Look here upon this picture and on this,

HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this

POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?

that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his

Possess it merely. That it should come to this:

So excellent a king, that was to this

Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this

HAMLET  But where was this?

O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

What warlike noise is this?

QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?

HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!

KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?

that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this

To tell us this.

HAMLET  This?

LAERTES  Why ask you this?

they ask you what it means, say you this:

KING  What dost thou mean by this?

skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his

for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is

Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;

And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

And what so poor a man as Hamlet is

GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis

Most holy and religious fear it is

not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is

Murder most foul, as in the best it is,

What majesty should be, what duty is,

is--

That not your trespass but my madness speaks.

That I in forgery of shapes and tricks

The heartache and the thousand natural shocks

As from the body of contraction plucks

Old grandsire Priam seeks.

Your visitation shall receive such thanks

HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;

Where should we have our thanks?

With this affair along. For all, our thanks.

but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks

QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.

I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]

for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks

Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;

Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.

Her father and myself, lawful espials,

All may be well.	[He kneels.]

Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;

[Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]

[He falls.]

[The Queen falls.]

Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,

Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,

And in this brainish apprehension kills

[He digs up more skulls.]

HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.

As to peace-parted souls.

With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?

that I have bad dreams.

"Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."

The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,

Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.

GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.

[It spreads his arms.]

To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms

A sister driven into desp'rate terms,

HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,

Weigh what convenience both of time and means

Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means

As checking at his voyage, and that he means

HORATIO  No, by no means.

HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means

what it means.

Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;

Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's

Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens

OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!

Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens

Mad let us grant him then, and now remains

about of brains.

Or I could make a prologue to my brains,

FORTINBRAS  Let four captains

HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

About her lank and all o'erteemed loins

To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions

Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.

Is the main motive of our preparations,

They have proclaimed their malefactions;

[Ghost beckons.]

Larded with many several sorts of reasons

KING  O, for two special reasons,

The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons

With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,

The insolence of office, and the spurns

T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,

The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]

But age with his stealing steps

But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips

For out o' doors he went without their helps

music. Look you, these are the stops.

In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,

She speaks much of her father, says she hears

Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears

And let us once again assail your ears,

[Pours the poison in his ears.]

That I have? He would drown the stage with tears

Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears

The light and careless livery that it wears

These words like daggers enter in my ears.

three-and-twenty years.

sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.

That was and is the question of these wars.

[A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers

Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers

He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders

[Enter the Players with recorders.]

recorders!

OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

Two Messengers

Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,

his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,

[Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]

[Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]

[Enter Horatio and others.]

[Enter Laertes with others.

a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's

I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers

The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.

As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,

And his commission to employ those soldiers,

Danish soldiers:

Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,

HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.

whispers

Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,

But keep a farm and carters.

it! It is the false steward that stole his master's

HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?

do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters

[Enter a Messenger with letters.]

Come, I will give you way for these your letters

With true-love showers.

[She scatters flowers.]

Larded all with sweet flowers;

He answers:

this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players

GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.

[Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]

with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,

[Enter the Players.]

[A flourish for the Players.]

HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players

With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players

fellowship in a cry of players?

Madam, it so fell out that certain players

Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers

POLONIUS  Come, sirs.

Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.

it himself. There are no tongues else for 's

[Enter Sailors.]

Sailors

To both your honors.

but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.

laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators

middle of her favors?

The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.

hours.

Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,

comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours

My lord, I have remembrances of yours

You go not till I set you up a glass

O'er this solidity and compound mass

from my lowest note to the top of my compass;

That it might please you to give quiet pass

HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.

This might be the pate of a politician which this ass

So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,

Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless

Without debatement further, more or less,

QUEEN  This is mere madness;

"Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,

And I the matter will reword, which madness

That I essentially am not in madness,

Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.

And makes as healthful music. It is not madness

article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness

pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness

And that shall lend a kind of easiness

easiness.

Answer, and think upon this business.

shall be the end of my business.

She turns to favor and to prettiness.

Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,

It lifted up its head and did address

Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress

Upon our first, he sent out to suppress

As one incapable of her own distress

Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.

Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.

And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,

Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?

Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats

Why you proceeded not against these feats,

Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats

Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,

With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!

Baked and impasted with the parching streets,

Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;

[He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]

With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--

And drive his purpose into these delights.

But I do prophesy th' election lights

POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!

And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;

that's for thoughts.

Free me so far in your most generous thoughts

thoughts.

hits.

That no revenue hast but thy good spirits

As he is very potent with such spirits,

But look, amazement on thy mother sits.

But mere implorators of unholy suits,

O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.

HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's

O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]

HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]

Come, for England.	[He exits.]

Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]

To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]

CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]

ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]

you.	[She exits.]

But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]

We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

[He exits.]

QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]

[The Other Man exits

[Player Queen exits.]

[Queen exits.]

[Francisco exits.]

Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]

[Horatio exits.]

[Horatio exits.]

Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]

LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]

HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]

[Polonius exits.]

[Polonius exits.]

[Polonius exits.]

[Hamlet exits.]

[Hamlet exits.]

[Ghost exits.]

[Ghost exits.]

[Ghost exits.]

Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,

Guildenstern and Attendants.]

Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]

with some Attendants.]

[King and Queen exit with Attendants.]

thousand tenants.

Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,

As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;

Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,

That, on the view and knowing of these contents,

And even the like precurse of feared events,

Between the pass and fell incensed points

And there I see such black and grained spots

Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts

Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;

That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests

Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests

To give in evidence. What then? What rests?

not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!

Bring him before us.

ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.

Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,

This unprevailing woe and think of us

Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.

With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus

'tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:

What is the reason that you use me thus?

It could not move thus.

Have you any further trade with us?

I like him not, nor stands it safe with us

If that his Majesty would aught with us,

Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus

Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus

KING  How long hath she been thus?

Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.

HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius

POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius

QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius

LAERTES, [to Claudius]

Cornelius.]

CORNELIUS

[Enter Queen and Polonius.]

KING, [advancing with Polonius]

[They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]

[Pointing to Polonius.]

REYNALDO, servant to Polonius

[Enter Polonius.]

[Enter Polonius.]

[Enter Polonius.]

[Enter Polonius.]

[Enter Polonius.]

KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?

KING  Where is Polonius?

Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?

Polonius.]

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

POLONIUS

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]

If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,

[Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]

Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.

Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.

Marcellus?

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

MARCELLUS

[Enter Lucianus.]

LUCIANUS

For your desire to know what is between us,

bounteous.

HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,

You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious

it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,

GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous

Yet have I in me something dangerous,

Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous

Whose image even but now appeared to us,

Be you content to lend your patience to us,

Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.

Of blue Olympus.

us

Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws

Thou still hast been the father of good news.

She is a strumpet. What news?

How now? What news?

and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.

light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows

There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,

This was your husband. Look you now what follows.

[The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]

Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,

knows,

Out of his brows.

Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.

Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]

Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,

That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,

And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows

King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days

This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.

As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.

both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.

On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,

From our achievements, though performed at

They are not near my conscience. Their defeat

HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat

That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,

Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great

verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great

recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great

GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great

Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat

Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,

I ha 't!

Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.

Osric to put on his hat.]

have seen play and heard others praise (and that

As may dishonor him, take heed of that,

of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that

POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?

GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.

Are of a most select and generous chief in that.

And for my soul, what can it do to that,

A villain kills my father, and for that,

LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?

OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?

(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,

REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.

I must to England, you know that.

that)

own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what

ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?

marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what

last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,

true. Let me question more in particular. What

POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what

HAMLET  What?

Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what

certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at

Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at

HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at

Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat

Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat

I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,

Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"

Denmark, and those that would make mouths at

in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at

To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.

Doth all the noble substance of a doubt

Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt

Is thought-sick at the act.

At game, a-swearing, or about some act

HAMLET  Such an act

HAMLET  What did you enact?

in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act

Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,

Nor any unproportioned thought his act.

That are but mutes or audience to this act,

But, howsomever thou pursues this act,

QUEEN  Ay me, what act

ACT 2

ACT 4

ACT 3

ACT 5

ACT 1

Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,

Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,

The leprous distilment, whose effect

That we find out the cause of this effect,

By letters congruing to that effect,

And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect

'Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project

Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,

Must give us pause. There's the respect

proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct

savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict

As will not leave their tinct.

To lay our service freely at your feet,

For and a shrouding sheet,

O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.

(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet

For such a guest is meet.

For such a guest is meet.

When in one line two crafts directly meet.

my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet

And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet

Methought it was very sweet

Most necessary 'tis that we forget

HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.

Grating so harshly all his days of quiet

And put it in his pocket--

Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let

[Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]

How does my good Lord Hamlet?

As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.

greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,

MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.

GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"

Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.

The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet

KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet

tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet

[They enter with Hamlet.]

You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]

this machine is to him, Hamlet.

Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,

KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?

HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?

and more strange return. Hamlet.

No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!

Speak to her, Hamlet.

KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.

[Enter Hamlet.]

[Enter Hamlet.]

[Enter Hamlet.]

[Enter Hamlet.]

Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.

KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/hamlet/

Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.

No more, sweet Hamlet!

QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!

Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet

Why, how now, Hamlet?

KING  Ay, Hamlet.

Hamlet,

Hamlet.

Hamlet.

Hamlet.

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

Hamlet

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

HAMLET

But you'll be secret?

[Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set

My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.

My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,

And with a sudden vigor it doth posset

Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set

And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet

And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.

POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,

Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift

those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.

height,

By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight

That lend a tyrannous and a damned light

Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,

This must be known, which, being kept close, might

him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might

might,"

Sport and repose lock from me day and night,

With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,

BARNARDO  Well, good night.

The death I gave him. So, again, good night.

Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.

FRANCISCO  Give you good night.

In the dead waste and middle of the night,

Doomed for a certain term to walk the night

'Tis now the very witching time of night,

What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,

Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.

Hold you the watch tonight?

HAMLET  I will watch tonight.

Let us impart what we have seen tonight

Never make known what you have seen tonight.

Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!

What, has this thing appeared again tonight?

That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,

And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,

My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

With us to watch the minutes of this night,

Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,

Thou livest; report me and my cause aright

HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.

KING  It falls right.

That ever I was born to set it right!

OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,

Or looked upon this love with idle sight?

And vanished from our sight.

If you have hitherto concealed this sight,

FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?

Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,

And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught

No, not I. I never gave you aught.

POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.

But answer made it none. Yet once methought

But in our circumstance and course of thought

Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,

With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought

thought,

Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it

HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it

Herod. Pray you, avoid it.

Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.

REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.

HAMLET  So be it.

of very liberal conceit.

Could force his soul so to his own conceit

So by his father lost. And this, I take it,

A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,

It fits your wisdom so far to believe it

HORATIO  Never believe it.

HAMLET  Do not believe it.

So have I heard and do in part believe it.

And, sister, as the winds give benefit

Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.

And draw you into madness? Think of it.

O, throw away the worser part of it,

To let you know of it.

And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,

forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.

We would not understand what was most fit,

Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,

And will not wrong it.

Than your particular demands will touch it.

If Hamlet give the first or second hit

OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.

Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it

But do not go with it.

It beckons you to go away with it

HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.

Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,

all "impawned," as you call it?

Good my lord, tell it.

To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;

So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,

He may approve our eyes and speak to it.

Did you not speak to it?

Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!

But truly I do fear it.

FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it

GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,

The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.

And am most sensibly in grief for it,

Thus much the business is: we have here writ

HAMLET  Whose was it?

straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it

[To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit

Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.

nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it

And I beseech you instantly to visit

Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it

but yet I could accuse me of such things that it

The hearers to collection. They aim at it

Heaven will direct it.

HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it

GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,

And I believe it is a fetch of wit.

Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,

It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.

It will not speak. Then I will follow it.

[All but the King exit.]

FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit

[All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]

and Lords exit.]

[Players exit.]

[Players exit.]

HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]

[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

[Ghost and Hamlet exit.]

[Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]

[All but Hamlet exit.]

[All but Hamlet exit.]

[All but Hamlet exit.]

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

[They exit.]

KING  We will try it.

it?

KING  I do not think 't.

O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt

O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,

It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt

So full of artless jealousy is guilt,

Of general assault.

HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant

OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?

And they can well on horseback, but this gallant

Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.

OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--

Against yourself. I know you are no truant.

And here give up ourselves in the full bent

Th' associates tend, and everything is bent

Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.

And call it accident.

I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.

HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent

Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.

How in my words somever she be shent,

Where we shall find him most convenient.

OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,

A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,

me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent

Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;

HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.

I stand aloof and will no reconcilement

I am sorry that with better heed and judgment

Divided from herself and her fair judgment,

And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment

HAMLET  Judgment!

Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.

But do not dull thy palm with entertainment

And enterprises of great pitch and moment

Is not to stir without great argument,

This grave shall have a living monument.

HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment

Why, man, they did make love to this employment.

Contagious blastments are most imminent.

Which is not tomb enough and continent

Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?

are spent.

Haply the seas, and countries different,

HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent

Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.

To give them seals never, my soul, consent.

Against the which a moiety competent

My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,

Do I impart toward you. For your intent

To give it due content.

Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent

your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent

Makes mouths at the invisible event,

Of thinking too precisely on th' event

Will be some danger; which for to prevent,

HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?

offense in 't?

That has no relish of salvation in 't--

That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point

lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,

HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.

Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:

ache to think on 't.

It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,

From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?

What think you on 't?

I have sworn 't.

Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt

No reck'ning made, but sent to my account

Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,

LAERTES  I will do 't,

hobby-horse is forgot."

breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got

Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot

That thou so many princes at a shot

[Drum, trumpets, and shot.]

OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.

Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot

Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot

LAERTES  O, fear me not.

O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not

To you in satisfaction; but if not,

A brother's murder. Pray can I not,

passes between yourself and him, he shall not

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.

Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.

Of all their conference. If she find him not,

place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.

GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.

HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.

Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot

HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not

Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not

Mark the encounter. If he love her not,

HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not

HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not

GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not

Looking before and after, gave us not

HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.

count myself a king of infinite space, were it not

Assume a virtue if you have it not.

Try what repentance can. What can it not?

If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.

might it not?

might it not?

relish of it. I loved you not.

could you not?

Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

In what particular thought to work I know not,

HAMLET  Nay, I know not.

ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.

I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,

With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,

ALL  My lord, from head to foot.

Go, bid the soldiers shoot.

HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?

GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't

Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;

friend, look to 't.

ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't

So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.

GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.

As by lot, God wot

GHOST  I find thee apt;

A face without a heart?

The head is not more native to the heart,

In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,

This something-settled matter in his heart,

And I am sick at heart.

If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,

And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,

It warms the very sickness in my heart

heart,

HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.

The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art

Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart

But farewell it, for I will use no art.

Or you deny me right. Go but apart,

I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,

We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part

mother's admiration? Impart.

Thy knotted and combined locks to part,

Such as it is), and for my own poor part,

QUEEN  More matter with less art.

desert.

Lest with this piteous action you convert

but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

To make it truster of your own report

And gave you such a masterly report

And with a look so piteous in purport

When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport

That she should lock herself from his resort,

As it is common for the younger sort

O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.

To hear of it. They are here about the court,

Courtiers at the Danish court:

That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court

Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,

The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--

My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

Such love must needs be treason in my breast.

Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,

Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--

[To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last

By laborsome petition, and at last

All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,

To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't

LAERTES  A Norman was 't?

A couch for luxury and damned incest.

liest.

May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,

And, when you are desirous to be blest,

the author of affection, but called it an honest

grown honest.

a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,

HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?

PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!

GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest

And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.

That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,

Give me one poor request.

This heavy-headed revel east and west

To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!

The ocean, overpeering of his list,

HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,

Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst

THE GHOST

[Enter Ghost.]

[Enter Ghost.]

[Enter Ghost.]

[Enter Ghost.]

HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!

GHOST

GHOST

GHOST

GHOST

GHOST

GHOST

And so have I a noble father lost,

lost,

Whose motive in this case should stir me most

Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most

HORATIO  That is most

She married. O, most wicked speed, to post

None wed the second but who killed the first.

th' worst.

In second husband let me be accurst.

A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.

Seek for thy noble father in the dust.

So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust

Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.

Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust

That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,

honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,

For good Polonius' death, and we have done but

baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but

King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but

shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but

would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but

And a most instant tetter barked about,

their trial, the bubbles are out.

That inward breaks and shows no cause without

Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.

The trumpet to the cannoneer without,

HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out

And either ... the devil or throw him out

Make you to ravel all this matter out

HAMLET  My fate cries out

By indirections find directions out.

if philosophy could find it out.

Treachery! Seek it out.

The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out

out

Not when I saw 't.

I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--

most best, believe it. Adieu.

'Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou

I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou

I'll rant as well as thou.

For husband shalt thou--

hadst thou!

"Thus didst thou."

GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou

HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,

Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You

So, proceed you.

HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.

enough. God hath given you one face, and you

OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you

HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you

Moreover that we much did long to see you,

gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you

diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you

you make of me! You would play upon me, you

To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.

To whom he more adheres. If it will please you

Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,

Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,

My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,

I will take my leave of you.

KING  He made confession of you

Where you may see the inmost part of you.

HORATIO  I beseech you.

HAMLET  I do beseech you.

Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--

Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.

And he to England shall along with you.

POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,

And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?

QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,

Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.

with you.

Had it th' ability of life to thank you.

HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you

Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--

It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.

not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you

POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.

And that in way of caution), I must tell you

But let me hear from you.

How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?

ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.

What I have said to you.

What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

With all my love I do commend me to you,

from me to you.

affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.

Ay, so, good-bye to you.

May do t' express his love and friending to you,

This marvel to you.

Laertes, was your father dear to you?

So grace and mercy at your most need help you.

letters for you.

(Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you

young Osric, who brings back to him that you

Before my daughter told me), what might you,

I'll visit you.

You, as your business and desire shall point you

the first row of the pious chanson will show you

Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.

HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?

HAMLET  I pray you.

Armed, say you?

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?

Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?

KING  Who shall stay you?

QUEEN  I shall obey you.

you,

you.

you?

Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,

Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!

OTHER  But is this law?

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.

recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw

QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,

[They withdraw.]

Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw

But greatly to find quarrel in a straw

Will not debate the question of this straw.

wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.

Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,

High on a stage be placed to the view,

It was about to speak when the cock crew.

Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew

strew

HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.

and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.

And I a maid at your window,

POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How

But I have that within which passes show,

Not of that dye which their investments show,

The bold winds speechless, and the orb below

My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;

A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow

Of these dilated articles allow.

dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow

assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--

Therefore, let's follow.

HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow

The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?

How should I your true love know

Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know

KING  Not that I know.

And tell you what I know.

But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,

Hath there been such a time (I would fain know

Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,

And praised be rashness for it; let us know,

And ever three parts coward), I do not know

OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,

It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know

Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,

and then, you know,

My lord, I'll hit him now.

HAMLET  What's the matter now?

How to forget that learning; but, sir, now

HAMLET  What hour now?

[Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--

His beard was as white as snow,

HAMLET  If she should break it now!

likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now

Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now

Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,

LAERTES  Have at you now!

And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,

now.

Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow

And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,

See what a grace was seated on this brow,

Does by their own insinuation grow.

Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow

And in the cup an union shall he throw,

And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw

Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,

Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow

That it went hand in hand even with the vow

No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,

To flaming youth let virtue be as wax

That roars so loud and thunders in the index?

would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six

conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,

How does your Honor for this many a day?

Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?

And do such bitter business as the day

And it must follow, as the night the day,

players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday

From the first corse till he that died today,

No jocund health that Denmark drinks today

I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"

[Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,

The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.

The changeling never known. Now, the next day

Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,

The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,

That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay

HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play

That guilty creatures sitting at a play

The hart ungalled play.

KING  What do you call the play?

Characters in the Play

POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.

But, if you hold it fit, after the play

LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]

[Prepare to play.]

entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?

HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play

For they are actions that a man might play;

matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,

HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play

LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]

And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--

play.

play.

Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay

'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may

HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may

Let Hercules himself do what he may,

Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,

With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;

My soul is full of discord and dismay.

OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.

Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,

That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,

And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.

I will go pray.

was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say

O, say!

Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.

no longer than they can sing? Will they not say

played once i' th' university, you say?

you say--

for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,

GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.

say,

Thus runs the world away.

Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.

KING  O Gertrude, come away!

And hit the woundless air. O, come away!

Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.

And at the sound it shrunk in haste away

Away, I do beseech you both, away.

If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,

BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.

Why, look you there, look how it steals away!

KING  Give me some light. Away!

HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?

OSRIC  Nothing neither way.

For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,

FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway

Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,

Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way

Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby

Here in the lobby.

the stairs into the lobby.

come by and by.

I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.

HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.

delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by

HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by

That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by

is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by

LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by

The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.

With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

No, in despite of sense and secrecy,

That you do bend your eye on vacancy

you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy

Here stooping to your clemency,

That he is open to incontinency;

HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.

To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy

Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,

no more marriage. Those that are married already,

MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.

Thou knowest already.

calf there.--Be the players ready?

in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.

One word more, good lady.

whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady

[Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,

HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?

KING  How do you, pretty lady?

For us and for our tragedy,

That, opened, lies within our remedy.

For if the King like not the comedy,

Here was a gentleman of Normandy.

What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

I have sent to seek him and to find the body.

The natural gates and alleys of the body,

Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body

All my smooth body.

And makes each petty arture in this body

With which she followed my poor father's body,

Unto the voice and yielding of that body

Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.

But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),

GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,

halt for 't. What players are they?

And how, and who, what means, and where they

Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they

This warlike volley.

The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy

quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why

HAMLET  Why?

HAMLET  Why,

HAMLET  Why,

well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

HAMLET  I embrace it freely

safely,

HAMLET  How "strangely"?

Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,

for the very substance of the ambitious is merely

On wholesome life usurp immediately.

Dost know this waterfly?

HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?

drowned herself wittingly.

Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--

Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

Yes, faith, heartily.

I am sorry they offend you, heartily;

custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily

HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.

Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.

tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.

you, though I know to divide him inventorially

man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully

greenly

Out of my weakness and my melancholy,

Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.

Most free in his reply.

is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply

Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,

You do not understand yourself so clearly

northerly.

love is too unmannerly.

With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,

Most constantly.

too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;

PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently

and presently.

POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.

Been struck so to the soul that presently

quaintly

this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my

This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my

GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my

Directly seasons him his enemy.

His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.

How smart a lash that speech doth give my

Would have mourned longer!), married with my

some frame and start not so wildly from my

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my

was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my

to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my

own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my

A Captain in Fortinbras's army

And hath abatements and delays as many

GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any

truepenny?

Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,

Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,

And there did seem in him a kind of joy

Each opposite that blanks the face of joy

Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,

The violence of either grief or joy

[Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

Their own enactures with themselves destroy.

Meet what I would have well and it destroy.

Happy in that we are not overhappy.

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary

Folger Shakespeare Library

to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary

As England was his faithful tributary,

How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.

When in your motion you are hot and dry

Well ratified by law and heraldry,

And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.

I am justly killed with mine own treachery.

And our vain blows malicious mockery.

all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.

HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every

length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very

He likewise gives a frock or livery

periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very

carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very

ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy

Purpose is but the slave to memory,

And these few precepts in thy memory

Yea, from the table of my memory

HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.

That are so fortified against our story,

To tell my story.

nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,

At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--

That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.

And who in want a hollow friend doth try

Of man and country--

A station like the herald Mercury

With this regard their currents turn awry

To the next abstinence, the next more easy;

Is not this something more than fantasy?

Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy

This bodiless creation ecstasy

HAMLET  Ecstasy?

For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,

And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!

Than to entreaty.

Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety

him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,

delight in, the tragedians of the city.

Of violent birth, but poor validity,

And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality

How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality

In neither aught, or in extremity.

From me, whose love was of that dignity

corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]

Doctor of Divinity

Passing through nature to eternity.

To his unmastered importunity.

That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,

[Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,

And women's fear and love hold quantity,

As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,

If you desire to know the certainty

To youth and liberty.

Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,

That they may seem the taints of liberty,

Thy natural magic and dire property

That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,

The lives of many. The cess of majesty

That live and feed upon your Majesty.

To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.

'twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty

should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.

than with honesty?

HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty

proverb is something musty.

HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

Over the nasty sty!

should admit no discourse to your beauty.

As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

And we did think it writ down in our duty

In that and all things will we show our duty.

Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.

Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,

Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy

[Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,

[Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]

[Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]

Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.

[Enter Rosencrantz.]

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

ROSENCRANTZ

HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.

]

=============================
		FILE ENDS HERE
============================= 





=================================
	ORIGINAL TEXT STARTS HERE
=================================
Hamlet

by William Shakespeare

Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles

Folger Shakespeare Library

https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/hamlet/

Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2



Characters in the Play

======================

THE GHOST

HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude

QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius

KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet

OPHELIA

LAERTES, her brother

POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius

REYNALDO, servant to Polonius

HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant

Courtiers at the Danish court:

VOLTEMAND

CORNELIUS

ROSENCRANTZ

GUILDENSTERN

OSRIC

Gentlemen

A Lord

Danish soldiers:

FRANCISCO

BARNARDO

MARCELLUS

FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway

A Captain in Fortinbras's army

Ambassadors to Denmark from England

Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>

Two Messengers

Sailors

Gravedigger

Gravedigger's companion

Doctor of Divinity

Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers





ACT 1

=====



Scene 1

=======

[Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]





BARNARDO  Who's there?



FRANCISCO

Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.



BARNARDO  Long live the King!



FRANCISCO  Barnardo?



BARNARDO  He.



FRANCISCO

You come most carefully upon your hour.



BARNARDO

'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.



FRANCISCO

For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,

And I am sick at heart.



BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?



FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.



BARNARDO  Well, good night.

If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,

The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.



[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]





FRANCISCO

I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?



HORATIO  Friends to this ground.



MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.



FRANCISCO  Give you good night.



MARCELLUS

O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved

you?



FRANCISCO

Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.

[Francisco exits.]



MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.



BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?



HORATIO  A piece of him.



BARNARDO

Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.



HORATIO

What, has this thing appeared again tonight?



BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.



MARCELLUS

Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy

And will not let belief take hold of him

Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.

Therefore I have entreated him along

With us to watch the minutes of this night,

That, if again this apparition come,

He may approve our eyes and speak to it.



HORATIO

Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.



BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,

And let us once again assail your ears,

That are so fortified against our story,

What we have two nights seen.



HORATIO  Well, sit we down,

And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.



BARNARDO  Last night of all,

When yond same star that's westward from the pole

Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven

Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,

The bell then beating one--



[Enter Ghost.]





MARCELLUS

Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.



BARNARDO

In the same figure like the King that's dead.



MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]

Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.



BARNARDO

Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.



HORATIO

Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.



BARNARDO

It would be spoke to.



MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.



HORATIO

What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,

Together with that fair and warlike form

In which the majesty of buried Denmark

Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,

speak.



MARCELLUS

It is offended.



BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.



HORATIO

Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!

[Ghost exits.]



MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.



BARNARDO

How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.

Is not this something more than fantasy?

What think you on 't?



HORATIO

Before my God, I might not this believe

Without the sensible and true avouch

Of mine own eyes.



MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?



HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.

Such was the very armor he had on

When he the ambitious Norway combated.

So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,

He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.

'Tis strange.



MARCELLUS

Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,

With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.



HORATIO

In what particular thought to work I know not,

But in the gross and scope of mine opinion

This bodes some strange eruption to our state.



MARCELLUS

Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,

Why this same strict and most observant watch

So nightly toils the subject of the land,

And why such daily cast of brazen cannon

And foreign mart for implements of war,

Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task

Does not divide the Sunday from the week.

What might be toward that this sweaty haste

Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?

Who is 't that can inform me?



HORATIO  That can I.

At least the whisper goes so: our last king,

Whose image even but now appeared to us,

Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,

Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,

Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet

(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)

Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,

Well ratified by law and heraldry,

Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands

Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.

Against the which a moiety competent

Was gaged by our king, which had returned

To the inheritance of Fortinbras

Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart

And carriage of the article designed,

His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,

Of unimproved mettle hot and full,

Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there

Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes

For food and diet to some enterprise

That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other

(As it doth well appear unto our state)

But to recover of us, by strong hand

And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands

So by his father lost. And this, I take it,

Is the main motive of our preparations,

The source of this our watch, and the chief head

Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.



BARNARDO

I think it be no other but e'en so.

Well may it sort that this portentous figure

Comes armed through our watch so like the king

That was and is the question of these wars.



HORATIO

A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.

In the most high and palmy state of Rome,

A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,

The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead

Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;

As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,

Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,

Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,

Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.

And even the like precurse of feared events,

As harbingers preceding still the fates

And prologue to the omen coming on,

Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated

Unto our climatures and countrymen.



[Enter Ghost.]



But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!

I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!

[It spreads his arms.]

If thou hast any sound or use of voice,

Speak to me.

If there be any good thing to be done

That may to thee do ease and grace to me,

Speak to me.

If thou art privy to thy country's fate,

Which happily foreknowing may avoid,

O, speak!

Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life

Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,

For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,

Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]

Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.



MARCELLUS

Shall I strike it with my partisan?



HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.



BARNARDO  'Tis here.



HORATIO  'Tis here.

[Ghost exits.]



MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.

We do it wrong, being so majestical,

To offer it the show of violence,

For it is as the air, invulnerable,

And our vain blows malicious mockery.



BARNARDO

It was about to speak when the cock crew.



HORATIO

And then it started like a guilty thing

Upon a fearful summons. I have heard

The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,

Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat

Awake the god of day, and at his warning,

Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,

Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies

To his confine, and of the truth herein

This present object made probation.



MARCELLUS

It faded on the crowing of the cock.

Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes

Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,

This bird of dawning singeth all night long;

And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,

The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,

No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,

So hallowed and so gracious is that time.



HORATIO

So have I heard and do in part believe it.

But look, the morn in russet mantle clad

Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.

Break we our watch up, and by my advice

Let us impart what we have seen tonight

Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,

This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.

Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it

As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?



MARCELLUS

Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know

Where we shall find him most convenient.

[They exit.]



Scene 2

=======

[Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the

Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,

Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and

Cornelius.]





KING

Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death

The memory be green, and that it us befitted

To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom

To be contracted in one brow of woe,

Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature

That we with wisest sorrow think on him

Together with remembrance of ourselves.

Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,

Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,

Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,

With an auspicious and a dropping eye,

With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,

In equal scale weighing delight and dole)

Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred

Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone

With this affair along. For all, our thanks.

Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,

Holding a weak supposal of our worth

Or thinking by our late dear brother's death

Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,

Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,

He hath not failed to pester us with message

Importing the surrender of those lands

Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,

To our most valiant brother--so much for him.

Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.

Thus much the business is: we have here writ

To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,

Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears

Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress

His further gait herein, in that the levies,

The lists, and full proportions are all made

Out of his subject; and we here dispatch

You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,

For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,

Giving to you no further personal power

To business with the King more than the scope

Of these dilated articles allow.

[Giving them a paper.]

Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.



CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND

In that and all things will we show our duty.



KING

We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.

[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?

You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?

You cannot speak of reason to the Dane

And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,

Laertes,

That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?

The head is not more native to the heart,

The hand more instrumental to the mouth,

Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.

What wouldst thou have, Laertes?



LAERTES  My dread lord,

Your leave and favor to return to France,

From whence though willingly I came to Denmark

To show my duty in your coronation,

Yet now I must confess, that duty done,

My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France

And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.



KING

Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?



POLONIUS

Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave

By laborsome petition, and at last

Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.

I do beseech you give him leave to go.



KING

Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,

And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--

But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--



HAMLET, [aside]

A little more than kin and less than kind.



KING

How is it that the clouds still hang on you?



HAMLET

Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.



QUEEN

Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,

And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.

Do not forever with thy vailed lids

Seek for thy noble father in the dust.

Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,

Passing through nature to eternity.



HAMLET

Ay, madam, it is common.



QUEEN  If it be,

Why seems it so particular with thee?



HAMLET

"Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."

'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,

Nor customary suits of solemn black,

Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,

No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,

Nor the dejected havior of the visage,

Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,

That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"

For they are actions that a man might play;

But I have that within which passes show,

These but the trappings and the suits of woe.



KING

'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,

Hamlet,

To give these mourning duties to your father.

But you must know your father lost a father,

That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound

In filial obligation for some term

To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever

In obstinate condolement is a course

Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.

It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,

A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,

An understanding simple and unschooled.

For what we know must be and is as common

As any the most vulgar thing to sense,

Why should we in our peevish opposition

Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,

A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,

To reason most absurd, whose common theme

Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,

From the first corse till he that died today,

"This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth

This unprevailing woe and think of us

As of a father; for let the world take note,

You are the most immediate to our throne,

And with no less nobility of love

Than that which dearest father bears his son

Do I impart toward you. For your intent

In going back to school in Wittenberg,

It is most retrograde to our desire,

And we beseech you, bend you to remain

Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,

Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.



QUEEN

Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.

I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.



HAMLET

I shall in all my best obey you, madam.



KING

Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.

Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.

This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet

Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof

No jocund health that Denmark drinks today

But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,

And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,

Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.

[Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]



HAMLET

O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,

Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,

Or that the Everlasting had not fixed

His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,

How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable

Seem to me all the uses of this world!

Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden

That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature

Possess it merely. That it should come to this:

But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.

So excellent a king, that was to this

Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother

That he might not beteem the winds of heaven

Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,

Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him

As if increase of appetite had grown

By what it fed on. And yet, within a month

(Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),

A little month, or ere those shoes were old

With which she followed my poor father's body,

Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she

(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason

Would have mourned longer!), married with my

uncle,

My father's brother, but no more like my father

Than I to Hercules. Within a month,

Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears

Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,

She married. O, most wicked speed, to post

With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!

It is not, nor it cannot come to good.

But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.



[Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]





HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.



HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.

Horatio--or I do forget myself!



HORATIO

The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.



HAMLET

Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.

And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--

Marcellus?



MARCELLUS  My good lord.



HAMLET

I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good

even, sir.--

But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?



HORATIO

A truant disposition, good my lord.



HAMLET

I would not hear your enemy say so,

Nor shall you do my ear that violence

To make it truster of your own report

Against yourself. I know you are no truant.

But what is your affair in Elsinore?

We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.



HORATIO

My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.



HAMLET

I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.

I think it was to see my mother's wedding.



HORATIO

Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.



HAMLET

Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats

Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.

Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven

Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!

My father--methinks I see my father.



HORATIO

Where, my lord?



HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.



HORATIO

I saw him once. He was a goodly king.



HAMLET

He was a man. Take him for all in all,

I shall not look upon his like again.



HORATIO

My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.



HAMLET  Saw who?



HORATIO

My lord, the King your father.



HAMLET  The King my father?



HORATIO

Season your admiration for a while

With an attent ear, till I may deliver

Upon the witness of these gentlemen

This marvel to you.



HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!



HORATIO

Two nights together had these gentlemen,

Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,

In the dead waste and middle of the night,

Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,

Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,

Appears before them and with solemn march

Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked

By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes

Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled

Almost to jelly with the act of fear,

Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me

In dreadful secrecy impart they did,

And I with them the third night kept the watch,

Where, as they had delivered, both in time,

Form of the thing (each word made true and good),

The apparition comes. I knew your father;

These hands are not more like.



HAMLET  But where was this?



MARCELLUS

My lord, upon the platform where we watch.



HAMLET

Did you not speak to it?



HORATIO  My lord, I did,

But answer made it none. Yet once methought

It lifted up its head and did address

Itself to motion, like as it would speak;

But even then the morning cock crew loud,

And at the sound it shrunk in haste away

And vanished from our sight.



HAMLET  'Tis very strange.



HORATIO

As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.

And we did think it writ down in our duty

To let you know of it.



HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.

Hold you the watch tonight?



ALL  We do, my lord.



HAMLET

Armed, say you?



ALL  Armed, my lord.



HAMLET  From top to toe?



ALL  My lord, from head to foot.



HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?



HORATIO

O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.



HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?



HORATIO

A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.



HAMLET  Pale or red?



HORATIO

Nay, very pale.



HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?



HORATIO

Most constantly.



HAMLET  I would I had been there.



HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.



HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?



HORATIO

While one with moderate haste might tell a

hundred.



BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.



HORATIO

Not when I saw 't.



HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?



HORATIO

It was as I have seen it in his life,

A sable silvered.



HAMLET  I will watch tonight.

Perchance 'twill walk again.



HORATIO  I warrant it will.



HAMLET

If it assume my noble father's person,

I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape

And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,

If you have hitherto concealed this sight,

Let it be tenable in your silence still;

And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,

Give it an understanding but no tongue.

I will requite your loves. So fare you well.

Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,

I'll visit you.



ALL  Our duty to your Honor.



HAMLET

Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.

[All but Hamlet exit.]

My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.

I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!

Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,

Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's

eyes.

[He exits.]



Scene 3

=======

[Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]





LAERTES

My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.

And, sister, as the winds give benefit

And convey is assistant, do not sleep,

But let me hear from you.



OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?



LAERTES

For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,

Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,

A violet in the youth of primy nature,

Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,

The perfume and suppliance of a minute,

No more.



OPHELIA  No more but so?



LAERTES  Think it no more.

For nature, crescent, does not grow alone

In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,

The inward service of the mind and soul

Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,

And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch

The virtue of his will; but you must fear,

His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,

For he himself is subject to his birth.

He may not, as unvalued persons do,

Carve for himself, for on his choice depends

The safety and the health of this whole state.

And therefore must his choice be circumscribed

Unto the voice and yielding of that body

Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves

you,

It fits your wisdom so far to believe it

As he in his particular act and place

May give his saying deed, which is no further

Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.

Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain

If with too credent ear you list his songs

Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open

To his unmastered importunity.

Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,

And keep you in the rear of your affection,

Out of the shot and danger of desire.

The chariest maid is prodigal enough

If she unmask her beauty to the moon.

Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.

The canker galls the infants of the spring

Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,

And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,

Contagious blastments are most imminent.

Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.

Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.



OPHELIA

I shall the effect of this good lesson keep

As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,

Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,

Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,

Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,

Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads

And recks not his own rede.



LAERTES  O, fear me not.



[Enter Polonius.]



I stay too long. But here my father comes.

A double blessing is a double grace.

Occasion smiles upon a second leave.



POLONIUS

Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!

The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,

And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with

thee.

And these few precepts in thy memory

Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,

Nor any unproportioned thought his act.

Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.

Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,

Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,

But do not dull thy palm with entertainment

Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware

Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,

Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.

Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.

Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.

Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,

But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),

For the apparel oft proclaims the man,

And they in France of the best rank and station

Are of a most select and generous chief in that.

Neither a borrower nor a lender be,

For loan oft loses both itself and friend,

And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.

This above all: to thine own self be true,

And it must follow, as the night the day,

Thou canst not then be false to any man.

Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.



LAERTES

Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.



POLONIUS

The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.



LAERTES

Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well

What I have said to you.



OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,

And you yourself shall keep the key of it.



LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]



POLONIUS

What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?



OPHELIA

So please you, something touching the Lord

Hamlet.



POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.

'Tis told me he hath very oft of late

Given private time to you, and you yourself

Have of your audience been most free and

bounteous.

If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,

And that in way of caution), I must tell you

You do not understand yourself so clearly

As it behooves my daughter and your honor.

What is between you? Give me up the truth.



OPHELIA

He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders

Of his affection to me.



POLONIUS

Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl

Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.

Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?



OPHELIA

I do not know, my lord, what I should think.



POLONIUS

Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby

That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,

Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,

Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,

Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.



OPHELIA

My lord, he hath importuned me with love

In honorable fashion--



POLONIUS

Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!



OPHELIA

And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,

With almost all the holy vows of heaven.



POLONIUS

Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,

When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul

Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,

Giving more light than heat, extinct in both

Even in their promise as it is a-making,

You must not take for fire. From this time

Be something scanter of your maiden presence.

Set your entreatments at a higher rate

Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,

Believe so much in him that he is young,

And with a larger tether may he walk

Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,

Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,

Not of that dye which their investments show,

But mere implorators of unholy suits,

Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds

The better to beguile. This is for all:

I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth

Have you so slander any moment leisure

As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.

Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.



OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.

[They exit.]



Scene 4

=======

[Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]





HAMLET

The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.



HORATIO

It is a nipping and an eager air.



HAMLET  What hour now?



HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.



MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.



HORATIO

Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season

Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.

[A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]

What does this mean, my lord?



HAMLET

The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,

Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;

And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,

The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out

The triumph of his pledge.



HORATIO  Is it a custom?



HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,

But, to my mind, though I am native here

And to the manner born, it is a custom

More honored in the breach than the observance.

This heavy-headed revel east and west

Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.

They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase

Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes

From our achievements, though performed at

height,

The pith and marrow of our attribute.

So oft it chances in particular men

That for some vicious mole of nature in them,

As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,

Since nature cannot choose his origin),

By the o'ergrowth of some complexion

(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),

Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens

The form of plausive manners--that these men,

Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,

Being nature's livery or fortune's star,

His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,

As infinite as man may undergo,

Shall in the general censure take corruption

From that particular fault. The dram of evil

Doth all the noble substance of a doubt

To his own scandal.



[Enter Ghost.]





HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.



HAMLET

Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!

Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,

Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from

hell,

Be thy intents wicked or charitable,

Thou com'st in such a questionable shape

That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"

"King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!

Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell

Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,

Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,

Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,

Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws

To cast thee up again. What may this mean

That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,

Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,

Making night hideous, and we fools of nature

So horridly to shake our disposition

With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?

Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?

[Ghost beckons.]



HORATIO

It beckons you to go away with it

As if it some impartment did desire

To you alone.



MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action

It waves you to a more removed ground.

But do not go with it.



HORATIO  No, by no means.



HAMLET

It will not speak. Then I will follow it.



HORATIO

Do not, my lord.



HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?

I do not set my life at a pin's fee.

And for my soul, what can it do to that,

Being a thing immortal as itself?

It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.



HORATIO

What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?

Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff

That beetles o'er his base into the sea,

And there assume some other horrible form

Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason

And draw you into madness? Think of it.

The very place puts toys of desperation,

Without more motive, into every brain

That looks so many fathoms to the sea

And hears it roar beneath.



HAMLET

It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.



MARCELLUS

You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]



HAMLET  Hold off your hands.



HORATIO

Be ruled. You shall not go.



HAMLET  My fate cries out

And makes each petty arture in this body

As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.

Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.

By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!

I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.

[Ghost and Hamlet exit.]



HORATIO

He waxes desperate with imagination.



MARCELLUS

Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.



HORATIO

Have after. To what issue will this come?



MARCELLUS

Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.



HORATIO

Heaven will direct it.



MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.

[They exit.]



Scene 5

=======

[Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]





HAMLET

Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no

further.



GHOST

Mark me.



HAMLET  I will.



GHOST  My hour is almost come

When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames

Must render up myself.



HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!



GHOST

Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing

To what I shall unfold.



HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.



GHOST

So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.



HAMLET  What?



GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,

Doomed for a certain term to walk the night

And for the day confined to fast in fires

Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature

Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid

To tell the secrets of my prison house,

I could a tale unfold whose lightest word

Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,

Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their

spheres,

Thy knotted and combined locks to part,

And each particular hair to stand an end,

Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.

But this eternal blazon must not be

To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!

If thou didst ever thy dear father love--



HAMLET  O God!



GHOST

Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.



HAMLET  Murder?



GHOST

Murder most foul, as in the best it is,

But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.



HAMLET

Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift

As meditation or the thoughts of love,

May sweep to my revenge.



GHOST  I find thee apt;

And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed

That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,

Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.

'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,

A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark

Is by a forged process of my death

Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,

The serpent that did sting thy father's life

Now wears his crown.



HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!



GHOST

Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,

With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--

O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power

So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust

The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.

O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!

From me, whose love was of that dignity

That it went hand in hand even with the vow

I made to her in marriage, and to decline

Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor

To those of mine.

But virtue, as it never will be moved,

Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,

So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,

Will sate itself in a celestial bed

And prey on garbage.

But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.

Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,

My custom always of the afternoon,

Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole

With juice of cursed hebona in a vial

And in the porches of my ears did pour

The leprous distilment, whose effect

Holds such an enmity with blood of man

That swift as quicksilver it courses through

The natural gates and alleys of the body,

And with a sudden vigor it doth posset

And curd, like eager droppings into milk,

The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,

And a most instant tetter barked about,

Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust

All my smooth body.

Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand

Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,

Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,

Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,

No reck'ning made, but sent to my account

With all my imperfections on my head.

O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!

If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.

Let not the royal bed of Denmark be

A couch for luxury and damned incest.

But, howsomever thou pursues this act,

Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive

Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven

And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge

To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.

The glowworm shows the matin to be near

And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.

Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]



HAMLET

O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?

And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,

And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,

But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?

Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat

In this distracted globe. Remember thee?

Yea, from the table of my memory

I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,

All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,

That youth and observation copied there,

And thy commandment all alone shall live

Within the book and volume of my brain,

Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!

O most pernicious woman!

O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!

My tables--meet it is I set it down

That one may smile and smile and be a villain.

At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.

[He writes.]

So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.

It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."

I have sworn 't.



[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]





HORATIO  My lord, my lord!



MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.



HORATIO  Heavens secure him!



HAMLET  So be it.



MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!



HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!



MARCELLUS

How is 't, my noble lord?



HORATIO  What news, my lord?



HAMLET  O, wonderful!



HORATIO

Good my lord, tell it.



HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.



HORATIO

Not I, my lord, by heaven.



MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.



HAMLET

How say you, then? Would heart of man once think

it?

But you'll be secret?



HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.



HAMLET

There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark

But he's an arrant knave.



HORATIO

There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave

To tell us this.



HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.

And so, without more circumstance at all,

I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,

You, as your business and desire shall point you

(For every man hath business and desire,

Such as it is), and for my own poor part,

I will go pray.



HORATIO

These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.



HAMLET

I am sorry they offend you, heartily;

Yes, faith, heartily.



HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.



HAMLET

Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,

And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,

It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.

For your desire to know what is between us,

O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,

As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,

Give me one poor request.



HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.



HAMLET

Never make known what you have seen tonight.



HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.



HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.



HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.



MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.



HAMLET

Upon my sword.



MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.



HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.



GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.



HAMLET

Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,

truepenny?

Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.

Consent to swear.



HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.



HAMLET

Never to speak of this that you have seen,

Swear by my sword.



GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.



HAMLET

Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.

Come hither, gentlemen,

And lay your hands again upon my sword.

Swear by my sword

Never to speak of this that you have heard.



GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.



HAMLET

Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--

A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.



HORATIO

O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.



HAMLET

And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.

There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,

Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.

Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,

How strange or odd some'er I bear myself

(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet

To put an antic disposition on)

That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,

With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,

Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,

As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we

would,"

Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they

might,"

Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note

That you know aught of me--this do swear,

So grace and mercy at your most need help you.



GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.



HAMLET

Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,

With all my love I do commend me to you,

And what so poor a man as Hamlet is

May do t' express his love and friending to you,

God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,

And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.

The time is out of joint. O cursed spite

That ever I was born to set it right!

Nay, come, let's go together.

[They exit.]





ACT 2

=====



Scene 1

=======

[Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]





POLONIUS

Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.



REYNALDO  I will, my lord.



POLONIUS

You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,

Before you visit him, to make inquire

Of his behavior.



REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.



POLONIUS

Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,

Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;

And how, and who, what means, and where they

keep,

What company, at what expense; and finding

By this encompassment and drift of question

That they do know my son, come you more nearer

Than your particular demands will touch it.

Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,

As thus: "I know his father and his friends

And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?



REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.



POLONIUS

"And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.

But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,

Addicted so and so." And there put on him

What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank

As may dishonor him, take heed of that,

But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips

As are companions noted and most known

To youth and liberty.



REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.



POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,

Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.



REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.



POLONIUS

Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.

You must not put another scandal on him

That he is open to incontinency;

That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so

quaintly

That they may seem the taints of liberty,

The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,

A savageness in unreclaimed blood,

Of general assault.



REYNALDO  But, my good lord--



POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?



REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.



POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,

And I believe it is a fetch of wit.

You, laying these slight sullies on my son,

As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,

Mark you, your party in converse, him you would

sound,

Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes

The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured

He closes with you in this consequence:

"Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"

According to the phrase or the addition

Of man and country--



REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.



POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what

was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say

something. Where did I leave?



REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,

or so," and "gentleman."



POLONIUS

At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--

He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.

I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"

(Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you

say,

There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,

There falling out at tennis"; or perchance

"I saw him enter such a house of sale"--

Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now

Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;

And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,

With windlasses and with assays of bias,

By indirections find directions out.

So by my former lecture and advice

Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?



REYNALDO

My lord, I have.



POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.



REYNALDO  Good my lord.



POLONIUS

Observe his inclination in yourself.



REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.



POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.



REYNALDO  Well, my lord.



POLONIUS

Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]



[Enter Ophelia.]



How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?



OPHELIA

O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!



POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?



OPHELIA

My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,

Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,

No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,

Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,

Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,

And with a look so piteous in purport

As if he had been loosed out of hell

To speak of horrors--he comes before me.



POLONIUS

Mad for thy love?



OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,

But truly I do fear it.



POLONIUS  What said he?



OPHELIA

He took me by the wrist and held me hard.

Then goes he to the length of all his arm,

And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,

He falls to such perusal of my face

As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.

At last, a little shaking of mine arm,

And thrice his head thus waving up and down,

He raised a sigh so piteous and profound

As it did seem to shatter all his bulk

And end his being. That done, he lets me go,

And, with his head over his shoulder turned,

He seemed to find his way without his eyes,

For out o' doors he went without their helps

And to the last bended their light on me.



POLONIUS

Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.

This is the very ecstasy of love,

Whose violent property fordoes itself

And leads the will to desperate undertakings

As oft as any passions under heaven

That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.

What, have you given him any hard words of late?



OPHELIA

No, my good lord, but as you did command

I did repel his letters and denied

His access to me.



POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.

I am sorry that with better heed and judgment

I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle

And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!

By heaven, it is as proper to our age

To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions

As it is common for the younger sort

To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.

This must be known, which, being kept close, might

move

More grief to hide than hate to utter love.

Come.

[They exit.]



Scene 2

=======

[Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and

Guildenstern and Attendants.]





KING

Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

Moreover that we much did long to see you,

The need we have to use you did provoke

Our hasty sending. Something have you heard

Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,

Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man

Resembles that it was. What it should be,

More than his father's death, that thus hath put him

So much from th' understanding of himself

I cannot dream of. I entreat you both

That, being of so young days brought up with him

And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,

That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court

Some little time, so by your companies

To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather

So much as from occasion you may glean,

Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus

That, opened, lies within our remedy.



QUEEN

Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,

And sure I am two men there is not living

To whom he more adheres. If it will please you

To show us so much gentry and goodwill

As to expend your time with us awhile

For the supply and profit of our hope,

Your visitation shall receive such thanks

As fits a king's remembrance.



ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties

Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,

Put your dread pleasures more into command

Than to entreaty.



GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,

And here give up ourselves in the full bent

To lay our service freely at your feet,

To be commanded.



KING

Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.



QUEEN

Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.

And I beseech you instantly to visit

My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,

And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.



GUILDENSTERN

Heavens make our presence and our practices

Pleasant and helpful to him!



QUEEN  Ay, amen!

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit

with some Attendants.]



[Enter Polonius.]





POLONIUS

Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,

Are joyfully returned.



KING

Thou still hast been the father of good news.



POLONIUS

Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege

I hold my duty as I hold my soul,

Both to my God and to my gracious king,

And I do think, or else this brain of mine

Hunts not the trail of policy so sure

As it hath used to do, that I have found

The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.



KING

O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.



POLONIUS

Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.

My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.



KING

Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.

[Polonius exits.]

He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found

The head and source of all your son's distemper.



QUEEN

I doubt it is no other but the main--

His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.



KING

Well, we shall sift him.



[Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with

Polonius.]



Welcome, my good friends.

Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?



VOLTEMAND

Most fair return of greetings and desires.

Upon our first, he sent out to suppress

His nephew's levies, which to him appeared

To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,

But, better looked into, he truly found

It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved

That so his sickness, age, and impotence

Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests

On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,

Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,

Makes vow before his uncle never more

To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.

Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,

Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual

fee

And his commission to employ those soldiers,

So levied as before, against the Polack,

With an entreaty, herein further shown,

[He gives a paper.]

That it might please you to give quiet pass

Through your dominions for this enterprise,

On such regards of safety and allowance

As therein are set down.



KING  It likes us well,

And, at our more considered time, we'll read,

Answer, and think upon this business.

Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.

Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.

Most welcome home!

[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]



POLONIUS  This business is well ended.

My liege, and madam, to expostulate

What majesty should be, what duty is,

Why day is day, night night, and time is time

Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.

Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,

And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,

I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.

"Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,

What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?

But let that go.



QUEEN  More matter with less art.



POLONIUS

Madam, I swear I use no art at all.

That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,

And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,

But farewell it, for I will use no art.

Mad let us grant him then, and now remains

That we find out the cause of this effect,

Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,

For this effect defective comes by cause.

Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.

Perpend.

I have a daughter (have while she is mine)

Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,

Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.

[He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the

most beautified Ophelia--

That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a

vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]

In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--



QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?



POLONIUS

Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.

[He reads the letter.]

Doubt thou the stars are fire,

Doubt that the sun doth move,

Doubt truth to be a liar,

But never doubt I love.

O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not

art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O

most best, believe it. Adieu.

Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst

this machine is to him, Hamlet.

This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,

And more above, hath his solicitings,

As they fell out by time, by means, and place,

All given to mine ear.



KING  But how hath she received his love?



POLONIUS  What do you think of me?



KING

As of a man faithful and honorable.



POLONIUS

I would fain prove so. But what might you think,

When I had seen this hot love on the wing

(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,

Before my daughter told me), what might you,

Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,

If I had played the desk or table-book

Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,

Or looked upon this love with idle sight?

What might you think? No, I went round to work,

And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:

"Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.

This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,

That she should lock herself from his resort,

Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;

Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,

And he, repelled (a short tale to make),

Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,

Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,

Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,

Into the madness wherein now he raves

And all we mourn for.



KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?



QUEEN  It may be, very like.



POLONIUS

Hath there been such a time (I would fain know

that)

That I have positively said "'Tis so,"

When it proved otherwise?



KING  Not that I know.



POLONIUS

Take this from this, if this be otherwise.

If circumstances lead me, I will find

Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,

Within the center.



KING  How may we try it further?



POLONIUS

You know sometimes he walks four hours together

Here in the lobby.



QUEEN  So he does indeed.



POLONIUS

At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.

[To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.

Mark the encounter. If he love her not,

And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,

Let me be no assistant for a state,

But keep a farm and carters.



KING  We will try it.



[Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]





QUEEN

But look where sadly the poor wretch comes

reading.



POLONIUS

Away, I do beseech you both, away.

I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.

[King and Queen exit with Attendants.]

How does my good Lord Hamlet?



HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.



POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?



HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.



POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.



HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.



POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?



HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to

be one man picked out of ten thousand.



POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.



HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead

dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a

daughter?



POLONIUS  I have, my lord.



HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a

blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,

friend, look to 't.



POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on

my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I

was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my

youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near

this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my

lord?



HAMLET  Words, words, words.



POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?



HAMLET  Between who?



POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.



HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here

that old men have gray beards, that their faces are

wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and

plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of

wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,

though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I

hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for

yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,

you could go backward.



POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is

method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?



HAMLET  Into my grave?



POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How

pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness

that often madness hits on, which reason and

sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I

will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of

meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,

I will take my leave of you.



HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I

will more willingly part withal--except my life,

except my life, except my life.



POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.



HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.



[Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]





POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.



ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.

[Polonius exits.]



GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.



ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.



HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,

Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do

you both?



ROSENCRANTZ

As the indifferent children of the earth.



GUILDENSTERN

Happy in that we are not overhappy.

On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.



HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?



ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.



HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the

middle of her favors?



GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.



HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!

She is a strumpet. What news?



ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's

grown honest.



HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not

true. Let me question more in particular. What

have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of

Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?



GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?



HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.



ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.



HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,

wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'

th' worst.



ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.



HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is

nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it

so. To me, it is a prison.



ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.

'Tis too narrow for your mind.



HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and

count myself a king of infinite space, were it not

that I have bad dreams.



GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,

for the very substance of the ambitious is merely

the shadow of a dream.



HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.



ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy

and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.



HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs

and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.

Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot

reason.



ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.



HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the

rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an

honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,

in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at

Elsinore?



ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.



HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;

but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks

are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?

Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?

Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,

speak.



GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?



HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent

for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks

which your modesties have not craft enough to

color. I know the good king and queen have sent for

you.



ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?



HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure

you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy

of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved

love, and by what more dear a better

proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct

with me whether you were sent for or no.



ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?



HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If

you love me, hold not off.



GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.



HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation

prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the

King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but

wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all

custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily

with my disposition that this goodly frame, the

Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most

excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging

firmament, this majestical roof, fretted

with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me

but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.

What a piece of work is a man, how noble in

reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving

how express and admirable; in action how like

an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the

beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and

yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man

delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by

your smiling you seem to say so.



ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my

thoughts.



HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man

delights not me"?



ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in

man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall

receive from you. We coted them on the way, and

hither are they coming to offer you service.



HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his

Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous

knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall

not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his

part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh

whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady

shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall

halt for 't. What players are they?



ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such

delight in, the tragedians of the city.



HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,

both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.



ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the

means of the late innovation.



HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did

when I was in the city? Are they so followed?



ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.



HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?



ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted

pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little

eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are

most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the

fashion and so berattle the common stages (so

they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid

of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.



HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?

How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality

no longer than they can sing? Will they not say

afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common

players (as it is most like, if their means are

no better), their writers do them wrong to make

them exclaim against their own succession?



ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on

both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar

them to controversy. There was for a while no

money bid for argument unless the poet and the

player went to cuffs in the question.



HAMLET  Is 't possible?



GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing

about of brains.



HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?



ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules

and his load too.



HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of

Denmark, and those that would make mouths at

him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,

a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.

'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,

if philosophy could find it out.

[A flourish for the Players.]



GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.



HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.

Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome

is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply

with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,

which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should

more appear like entertainment than yours. You are

welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are

deceived.



GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?



HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the

wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.



[Enter Polonius.]





POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.



HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at

each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is

not yet out of his swaddling clouts.



ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to

them, for they say an old man is twice a child.



HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the

players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday

morning, 'twas then indeed.



POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.



HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius

was an actor in Rome--



POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.



HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.



POLONIUS  Upon my honor--



HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.



POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for

tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,

historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,

tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or

poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor

Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,

these are the only men.



HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure

hadst thou!



POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?



HAMLET  Why,

One fair daughter, and no more,

The which he loved passing well.



POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.



HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?



POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a

daughter that I love passing well.



HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.



POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?



HAMLET  Why,

As by lot, God wot

and then, you know,

It came to pass, as most like it was--

the first row of the pious chanson will show you

more, for look where my abridgment comes.



[Enter the Players.]



You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad

to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my

old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee

last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,

my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship

is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by

the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a

piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the

ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't

like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll

have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your

quality. Come, a passionate speech.



FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?



HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it

was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for

the play, I remember, pleased not the million:

'twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I

received it, and others whose judgments in such

matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,

well digested in the scenes, set down with as much

modesty as cunning. I remember one said there

were no sallets in the lines to make the matter

savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict

the author of affection, but called it an honest

method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,

more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I

chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and

thereabout of it especially when he speaks of

Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at

this line--let me see, let me see:

The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--

'tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:

The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,

Black as his purpose, did the night resemble

When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,

Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared

With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,

Now is he total gules, horridly tricked

With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,

Baked and impasted with the parching streets,

That lend a tyrannous and a damned light

To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,

And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,

With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus

Old grandsire Priam seeks.

So, proceed you.



POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good

accent and good discretion.



FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him

Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,

Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,

Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,

Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;

But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword

Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,

Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top

Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash

Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,

Which was declining on the milky head

Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.

So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood

And, like a neutral to his will and matter,

Did nothing.

But as we often see against some storm

A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,

The bold winds speechless, and the orb below

As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder

Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,

Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,

And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall

On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,

With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword

Now falls on Priam.

Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods

In general synod take away her power,

Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,

And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven

As low as to the fiends!



POLONIUS  This is too long.



HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--

Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or

he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.



FIRST PLAYER

But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--



HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?



POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.



FIRST PLAYER

Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames

With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head

Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,

About her lank and all o'erteemed loins

A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--

Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,

'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have

pronounced.

But if the gods themselves did see her then

When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport

In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,

The instant burst of clamor that she made

(Unless things mortal move them not at all)

Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven

And passion in the gods.



POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and

has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.



HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of

this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players

well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,

for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the

time. After your death you were better have a bad

epitaph than their ill report while you live.



POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their

desert.



HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every

man after his desert and who shall 'scape

whipping? Use them after your own honor and

dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in

your bounty. Take them in.



POLONIUS  Come, sirs.



HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play

tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to

the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can

you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?



FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.



HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a

need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen

lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,

could you not?



FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.



HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you

mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,

I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.



ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.



HAMLET

Ay, so, good-bye to you.

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

Now I am alone.

O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!

Is it not monstrous that this player here,

But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,

Could force his soul so to his own conceit

That from her working all his visage wanned,

Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,

A broken voice, and his whole function suiting

With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!

For Hecuba!

What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,

That he should weep for her? What would he do

Had he the motive and the cue for passion

That I have? He would drown the stage with tears

And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,

Make mad the guilty and appall the free,

Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed

The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,

A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak

Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,

And can say nothing--no, not for a king

Upon whose property and most dear life

A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?

Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?

Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?

Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat

As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?

Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be

But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall

To make oppression bitter, or ere this

I should have fatted all the region kites

With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!

Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless

villain!

O vengeance!

Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,

That I, the son of a dear father murdered,

Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,

Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words

And fall a-cursing like a very drab,

A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!

About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard

That guilty creatures sitting at a play

Have, by the very cunning of the scene,

Been struck so to the soul that presently

They have proclaimed their malefactions;

For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak

With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players

Play something like the murder of my father

Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;

I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,

I know my course. The spirit that I have seen

May be a devil, and the devil hath power

T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,

Out of my weakness and my melancholy,

As he is very potent with such spirits,

Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds

More relative than this. The play's the thing

Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.

[He exits.]





ACT 3

=====



Scene 1

=======

[Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,

Guildenstern, and Lords.]





KING

And can you by no drift of conference

Get from him why he puts on this confusion,

Grating so harshly all his days of quiet

With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?



ROSENCRANTZ

He does confess he feels himself distracted,

But from what cause he will by no means speak.



GUILDENSTERN

Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,

But with a crafty madness keeps aloof

When we would bring him on to some confession

Of his true state.



QUEEN  Did he receive you well?



ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.



GUILDENSTERN

But with much forcing of his disposition.



ROSENCRANTZ

Niggard of question, but of our demands

Most free in his reply.



QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?



ROSENCRANTZ

Madam, it so fell out that certain players

We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,

And there did seem in him a kind of joy

To hear of it. They are here about the court,

And, as I think, they have already order

This night to play before him.



POLONIUS  'Tis most true,

And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties

To hear and see the matter.



KING

With all my heart, and it doth much content me

To hear him so inclined.

Good gentlemen, give him a further edge

And drive his purpose into these delights.



ROSENCRANTZ

We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern

and Lords exit.]



KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,

For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,

That he, as 'twere by accident, may here

Affront Ophelia.

Her father and myself, lawful espials,

Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,

We may of their encounter frankly judge

And gather by him, as he is behaved,

If 't be th' affliction of his love or no

That thus he suffers for.



QUEEN  I shall obey you.

And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish

That your good beauties be the happy cause

Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues

Will bring him to his wonted way again,

To both your honors.



OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.

[Queen exits.]



POLONIUS

Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,

We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this

book,

That show of such an exercise may color

Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this

('Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage

And pious action we do sugar o'er

The devil himself.



KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!

How smart a lash that speech doth give my

conscience.

The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art

Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it

Than is my deed to my most painted word.

O heavy burden!



POLONIUS

I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.

[They withdraw.]



[Enter Hamlet.]





HAMLET

To be or not to be--that is the question:

Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer

The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,

Or to take arms against a sea of troubles

And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--

No more--and by a sleep to say we end

The heartache and the thousand natural shocks

That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation

Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--

To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,

For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,

When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,

Must give us pause. There's the respect

That makes calamity of so long life.

For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,

Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,

The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,

The insolence of office, and the spurns

That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,

When he himself might his quietus make

With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,

To grunt and sweat under a weary life,

But that the dread of something after death,

The undiscovered country from whose bourn

No traveler returns, puzzles the will

And makes us rather bear those ills we have

Than fly to others that we know not of?

Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,

And thus the native hue of resolution

Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,

And enterprises of great pitch and moment

With this regard their currents turn awry

And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,

The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons

Be all my sins remembered.



OPHELIA  Good my lord,

How does your Honor for this many a day?



HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.



OPHELIA

My lord, I have remembrances of yours

That I have longed long to redeliver.

I pray you now receive them.



HAMLET

No, not I. I never gave you aught.



OPHELIA

My honored lord, you know right well you did,

And with them words of so sweet breath composed

As made the things more rich. Their perfume

lost,

Take these again, for to the noble mind

Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.

There, my lord.



HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?



OPHELIA  My lord?



HAMLET  Are you fair?



OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?



HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty

should admit no discourse to your beauty.



OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce

than with honesty?



HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner

transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than

the force of honesty can translate beauty into his

likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now

the time gives it proof. I did love you once.



OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.



HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue

cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall

relish of it. I loved you not.



OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.



HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be

a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,

but yet I could accuse me of such things that it

were better my mother had not borne me: I am

very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses

at my beck than I have thoughts to put them

in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act

them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling

between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves

all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.

Where's your father?



OPHELIA  At home, my lord.



HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may

play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.



OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!



HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague

for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as

snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a

nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,

marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what

monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and

quickly too. Farewell.



OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!



HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well

enough. God hath given you one face, and you

make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and

you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make

your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no

more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have

no more marriage. Those that are married already,

all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.

To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]



OPHELIA

O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!

The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,

sword,

Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,

The glass of fashion and the mold of form,

Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!

And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,

That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,

Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,

Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;

That unmatched form and stature of blown youth

Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me

T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!



KING, [advancing with Polonius]

Love? His affections do not that way tend;

Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,

Was not like madness. There's something in his soul

O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,

And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose

Will be some danger; which for to prevent,

I have in quick determination

Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England

For the demand of our neglected tribute.

Haply the seas, and countries different,

With variable objects, shall expel

This something-settled matter in his heart,

Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus

From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?



POLONIUS

It shall do well. But yet do I believe

The origin and commencement of his grief

Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?

You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;

We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,

But, if you hold it fit, after the play

Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him

To show his grief. Let her be round with him;

And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear

Of all their conference. If she find him not,

To England send him, or confine him where

Your wisdom best shall think.



KING  It shall be so.

Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.

[They exit.]



Scene 2

=======

[Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]





HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced

it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth

it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the

town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air

too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;

for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,

whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and

beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,

it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,

periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very

rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the

most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable

dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow

whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods

Herod. Pray you, avoid it.



PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.



HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own

discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the

word, the word to the action, with this special

observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of

nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose

of playing, whose end, both at the first and

now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to

nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her

own image, and the very age and body of the time

his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come

tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,

cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure

of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh

a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I

have seen play and heard others praise (and that

highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither

having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of

Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and

bellowed that I have thought some of nature's

journeymen had made men, and not made them

well, they imitated humanity so abominably.



PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently

with us, sir.



HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play

your clowns speak no more than is set down for

them, for there be of them that will themselves

laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators

to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary

question of the play be then to be considered.

That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition

in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.

[Players exit.]



[Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]



How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of

work?



POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.



HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]

Will you two help to hasten them?



ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]



HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!



[Enter Horatio.]





HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.



HAMLET

Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man

As e'er my conversation coped withal.



HORATIO

O, my dear lord--



HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,

For what advancement may I hope from thee

That no revenue hast but thy good spirits

To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be

flattered?

No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp

And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee

Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?

Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice

And could of men distinguish, her election

Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been

As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,

A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards

Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those

Whose blood and judgment are so well

commeddled

That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger

To sound what stop she please. Give me that man

That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him

In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,

As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--

There is a play tonight before the King.

One scene of it comes near the circumstance

Which I have told thee of my father's death.

I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,

Even with the very comment of thy soul

Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt

Do not itself unkennel in one speech,

It is a damned ghost that we have seen,

And my imaginations are as foul

As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,

For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,

And, after, we will both our judgments join

In censure of his seeming.



HORATIO  Well, my lord.

If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing

And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.

[Sound a flourish.]



HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.

Get you a place.



[Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,

Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other

Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying

torches.]





KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?



HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I

eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed

capons so.



KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These

words are not mine.



HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you

played once i' th' university, you say?



POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a

good actor.



HAMLET  What did you enact?



POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'

Capitol. Brutus killed me.



HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a

calf there.--Be the players ready?



ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your

patience.



QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.



HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more

attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]



POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?



HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?



OPHELIA  No, my lord.



HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?



OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.



HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?



OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.



HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'

legs.



OPHELIA  What is, my lord?



HAMLET  Nothing.



OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.



HAMLET  Who, I?



OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.



HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a

man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully

my mother looks, and my father died within 's two

hours.



OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.



HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,

for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two

months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's

hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half

a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,

or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the

hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the

hobby-horse is forgot."

[The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]



[Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen

embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of

protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his

head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of

flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon

comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours

poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen

returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The

poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to

condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The

poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh

awhile but in the end accepts his love.]

[Players exit.]



OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?



HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means

mischief.



OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the

play.



[Enter Prologue.]





HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players

cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.



OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?



HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be

not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you

what it means.



OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the

play.



PROLOGUE

For us and for our tragedy,

Here stooping to your clemency,

We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]



HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?



OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.



HAMLET  As woman's love.



[Enter the Player King and Queen.]





PLAYER KING

Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round

Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,

And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen

About the world have times twelve thirties been

Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands

Unite commutual in most sacred bands.



PLAYER QUEEN

So many journeys may the sun and moon

Make us again count o'er ere love be done!

But woe is me! You are so sick of late,

So far from cheer and from your former state,

That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,

Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.

For women fear too much, even as they love,

And women's fear and love hold quantity,

In neither aught, or in extremity.

Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,

And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:

Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;

Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.



PLAYER KING

Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.

My operant powers their functions leave to do.

And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,

Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind

For husband shalt thou--



PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!

Such love must needs be treason in my breast.

In second husband let me be accurst.

None wed the second but who killed the first.



HAMLET  That's wormwood!



PLAYER QUEEN

The instances that second marriage move

Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.

A second time I kill my husband dead

When second husband kisses me in bed.



PLAYER KING

I do believe you think what now you speak,

But what we do determine oft we break.

Purpose is but the slave to memory,

Of violent birth, but poor validity,

Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree

But fall unshaken when they mellow be.

Most necessary 'tis that we forget

To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.

What to ourselves in passion we propose,

The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.

The violence of either grief or joy

Their own enactures with themselves destroy.

Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;

Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.

This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange

That even our loves should with our fortunes change;

For 'tis a question left us yet to prove

Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.

The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;

The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.

And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,

For who not needs shall never lack a friend,

And who in want a hollow friend doth try

Directly seasons him his enemy.

But, orderly to end where I begun:

Our wills and fates do so contrary run

That our devices still are overthrown;

Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.

So think thou wilt no second husband wed,

But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.



PLAYER QUEEN

Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,

Sport and repose lock from me day and night,

To desperation turn my trust and hope,

An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.

Each opposite that blanks the face of joy

Meet what I would have well and it destroy.

Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,

If, once a widow, ever I be wife.



HAMLET  If she should break it now!



PLAYER KING

'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.

My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile

The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]



PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,

And never come mischance between us twain.

[Player Queen exits.]



HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?



QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.



HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.



KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no

offense in 't?



HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No

offense i' th' world.



KING  What do you call the play?



HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.

This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.

Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You

shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but

what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free

souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;

our withers are unwrung.



[Enter Lucianus.]



This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.



OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.



HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,

if I could see the puppets dallying.



OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.



HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine

edge.



OPHELIA  Still better and worse.



HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,

murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and

begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for

revenge.



LUCIANUS

Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time

agreeing,

Confederate season, else no creature seeing,

Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,

With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,

Thy natural magic and dire property

On wholesome life usurp immediately.

[Pours the poison in his ears.]



HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His

name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in

very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the

murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.

[Claudius rises.]



OPHELIA  The King rises.



HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?



QUEEN  How fares my lord?



POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.



KING  Give me some light. Away!



POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!

[All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]



HAMLET

Why, let the strucken deer go weep,

The hart ungalled play.

For some must watch, while some must sleep:

Thus runs the world away.

Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the

rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two

Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a

fellowship in a cry of players?



HORATIO  Half a share.



HAMLET  A whole one, I.

For thou dost know, O Damon dear,

This realm dismantled was

Of Jove himself, and now reigns here

A very very--pajock.



HORATIO  You might have rhymed.



HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for

a thousand pound. Didst perceive?



HORATIO  Very well, my lord.



HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?



HORATIO  I did very well note him.



HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the

recorders!

For if the King like not the comedy,

Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.

Come, some music!



[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]





GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word

with you.



HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.



GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--



HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?



GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous

distempered.



HAMLET  With drink, sir?



GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.



HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer

to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to

his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more

choler.



GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into

some frame and start not so wildly from my

affair.



HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.



GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great

affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.



HAMLET  You are welcome.



GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not

of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me

a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's

commandment. If not, your pardon and my return

shall be the end of my business.



HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.



ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?



HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's

diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you

shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.

Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,

you say--



ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath

struck her into amazement and admiration.



HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!

But is there no sequel at the heels of this

mother's admiration? Impart.



ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her

closet ere you go to bed.



HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.

Have you any further trade with us?



ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.



HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.



ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of

distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your

own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.



HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.



ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the

voice of the King himself for your succession in

Denmark?



HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the

proverb is something musty.



[Enter the Players with recorders.]



O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a

recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw

with you: why do you go about to recover the wind

of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?



GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my

love is too unmannerly.



HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play

upon this pipe?



GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.



HAMLET  I pray you.



GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.



HAMLET  I do beseech you.



GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.



HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages

with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with

your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent

music. Look you, these are the stops.



GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any

utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.



HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing

you make of me! You would play upon me, you

would seem to know my stops, you would pluck

out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me

from my lowest note to the top of my compass;

and there is much music, excellent voice, in this

little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,

do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?

Call me what instrument you will, though you can

fret me, you cannot play upon me.



[Enter Polonius.]



God bless you, sir.



POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,

and presently.



HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in

shape of a camel?



POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.



HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.



POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.



HAMLET  Or like a whale.



POLONIUS  Very like a whale.



HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.

[Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will

come by and by.



POLONIUS  I will say so.



HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,

friends.

[All but Hamlet exit.]

'Tis now the very witching time of night,

When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes

out

Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot

blood

And do such bitter business as the day

Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.

O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever

The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.

Let me be cruel, not unnatural.

I will speak daggers to her, but use none.

My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:

How in my words somever she be shent,

To give them seals never, my soul, consent.

[He exits.]



Scene 3

=======

[Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]





KING

I like him not, nor stands it safe with us

To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.

I your commission will forthwith dispatch,

And he to England shall along with you.

The terms of our estate may not endure

Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow

Out of his brows.



GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.

Most holy and religious fear it is

To keep those many many bodies safe

That live and feed upon your Majesty.



ROSENCRANTZ

The single and peculiar life is bound

With all the strength and armor of the mind

To keep itself from noyance, but much more

That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests

The lives of many. The cess of majesty

Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw

What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel

Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,

To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things

Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,

Each small annexment, petty consequence,

Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone

Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.



KING

Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,

For we will fetters put about this fear,

Which now goes too free-footed.



ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]



[Enter Polonius.]





POLONIUS

My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.

Behind the arras I'll convey myself

To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him

home;

And, as you said (and wisely was it said),

'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,

Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear

The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.

I'll call upon you ere you go to bed

And tell you what I know.



KING  Thanks, dear my lord.

[Polonius exits.]

O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;

It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,

A brother's murder. Pray can I not,

Though inclination be as sharp as will.

My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,

And, like a man to double business bound,

I stand in pause where I shall first begin

And both neglect. What if this cursed hand

Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?

Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens

To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy

But to confront the visage of offense?

And what's in prayer but this twofold force,

To be forestalled ere we come to fall,

Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.

My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer

Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?

That cannot be, since I am still possessed

Of those effects for which I did the murder:

My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.

May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?

In the corrupted currents of this world,

Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,

And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself

Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:

There is no shuffling; there the action lies

In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,

Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,

To give in evidence. What then? What rests?

Try what repentance can. What can it not?

Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?

O wretched state! O bosom black as death!

O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,

Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.

Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel

Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.

All may be well.	[He kneels.]



[Enter Hamlet.]





HAMLET

Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,

And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]

And so he goes to heaven,

And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:

A villain kills my father, and for that,

I, his sole son, do this same villain send

To heaven.

Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.

He took my father grossly, full of bread,

With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;

And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.

But in our circumstance and course of thought

'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged

To take him in the purging of his soul,

When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?

No.

Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.

[He sheathes his sword.]

When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,

Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,

At game, a-swearing, or about some act

That has no relish of salvation in 't--

Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,

And that his soul may be as damned and black

As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.

This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.

[Hamlet exits.]



KING, [rising]

My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;

Words without thoughts never to heaven go.

[He exits.]



Scene 4

=======

[Enter Queen and Polonius.]





POLONIUS

He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.

Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear

with

And that your Grace hath screened and stood

between

Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.

Pray you, be round with him.



HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!



QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,

I hear him coming.

[Polonius hides behind the arras.]



[Enter Hamlet.]





HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?



QUEEN

Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.



HAMLET

Mother, you have my father much offended.



QUEEN

Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.



HAMLET

Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.



QUEEN

Why, how now, Hamlet?



HAMLET  What's the matter now?



QUEEN

Have you forgot me?



HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.

You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,

And (would it were not so) you are my mother.



QUEEN

Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.



HAMLET

Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.

You go not till I set you up a glass

Where you may see the inmost part of you.



QUEEN

What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?

Help, ho!



POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!



HAMLET

How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.

[He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier

through the arras.]



POLONIUS, [behind the arras]

O, I am slain!



QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?



HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?



QUEEN

O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!



HAMLET

A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,

As kill a king and marry with his brother.



QUEEN

As kill a king?



HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.

[He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]

Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.

I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.

Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.

[To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit

you down,

And let me wring your heart; for so I shall

If it be made of penetrable stuff,

If damned custom have not brazed it so

That it be proof and bulwark against sense.



QUEEN

What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue

In noise so rude against me?



HAMLET  Such an act

That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,

Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose

From the fair forehead of an innocent love

And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows

As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed

As from the body of contraction plucks

The very soul, and sweet religion makes

A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow

O'er this solidity and compound mass

With heated visage, as against the doom,

Is thought-sick at the act.



QUEEN  Ay me, what act

That roars so loud and thunders in the index?



HAMLET

Look here upon this picture and on this,

The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.

See what a grace was seated on this brow,

Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,

An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,

A station like the herald Mercury

New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,

A combination and a form indeed

Where every god did seem to set his seal

To give the world assurance of a man.

This was your husband. Look you now what follows.

Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear

Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?

Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed

And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?

You cannot call it love, for at your age

The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble

And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment

Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,

Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense

Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,

Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,

But it reserved some quantity of choice

To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't

That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?

Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,

Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,

Or but a sickly part of one true sense

Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?

Rebellious hell,

If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,

To flaming youth let virtue be as wax

And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame

When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,

Since frost itself as actively doth burn,

And reason panders will.



QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!

Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,

And there I see such black and grained spots

As will not leave their tinct.



HAMLET  Nay, but to live

In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,

Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love

Over the nasty sty!



QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!

These words like daggers enter in my ears.

No more, sweet Hamlet!



HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,

A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe

Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,

A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,

That from a shelf the precious diadem stole

And put it in his pocket--



QUEEN  No more!



HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--



[Enter Ghost.]



Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,

You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious

figure?



QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.



HAMLET

Do you not come your tardy son to chide,

That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by

Th' important acting of your dread command?

O, say!



GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation

Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.

But look, amazement on thy mother sits.

O, step between her and her fighting soul.

Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.

Speak to her, Hamlet.



HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?



QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,

That you do bend your eye on vacancy

And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?

Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,

And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,

Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,

Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,

Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper

Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?



HAMLET

On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.

His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,

Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not

look upon me,

Lest with this piteous action you convert

My stern effects. Then what I have to do

Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.



QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?



HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?



QUEEN

Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.



HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?



QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.



HAMLET

Why, look you there, look how it steals away!

My father, in his habit as he lived!

Look where he goes even now out at the portal!

[Ghost exits.]



QUEEN

This is the very coinage of your brain.

This bodiless creation ecstasy

Is very cunning in.



HAMLET  Ecstasy?

My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time

And makes as healthful music. It is not madness

That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,

And I the matter will reword, which madness

Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,

Lay not that flattering unction to your soul

That not your trespass but my madness speaks.

It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,

Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,

Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,

Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,

And do not spread the compost on the weeds

To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,

For, in the fatness of these pursy times,

Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,

Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.



QUEEN

O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!



HAMLET

O, throw away the worser part of it,

And live the purer with the other half!

Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.

Assume a virtue if you have it not.

That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,

Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,

That to the use of actions fair and good

He likewise gives a frock or livery

That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,

And that shall lend a kind of easiness

To the next abstinence, the next more easy;

For use almost can change the stamp of nature

And either ... the devil or throw him out

With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,

And, when you are desirous to be blest,

I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord

[Pointing to Polonius.]

I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so

To punish me with this and this with me,

That I must be their scourge and minister.

I will bestow him and will answer well

The death I gave him. So, again, good night.

I must be cruel only to be kind.

This bad begins, and worse remains behind.

One word more, good lady.



QUEEN  What shall I do?



HAMLET

Not this by no means that I bid you do:

Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,

Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,

And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses

Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,

Make you to ravel all this matter out

That I essentially am not in madness,

But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,

For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,

Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,

Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?

No, in despite of sense and secrecy,

Unpeg the basket on the house's top,

Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,

To try conclusions, in the basket creep

And break your own neck down.



QUEEN

Be thou assured, if words be made of breath

And breath of life, I have no life to breathe

What thou hast said to me.



HAMLET

I must to England, you know that.



QUEEN  Alack,

I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.



HAMLET

There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,

Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,

They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way

And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,

For 'tis the sport to have the enginer

Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard

But I will delve one yard below their mines

And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet

When in one line two crafts directly meet.

This man shall set me packing.

I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.

Mother, good night indeed. This counselor

Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,

Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--

Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--

Good night, mother.

[They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]





ACT 4

=====



Scene 1

=======

[Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and

Guildenstern.]





KING

There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves

You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.

Where is your son?



QUEEN

Bestow this place on us a little while.

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!



KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?



QUEEN

Mad as the sea and wind when both contend

Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,

Behind the arras hearing something stir,

Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"

And in this brainish apprehension kills

The unseen good old man.



KING  O heavy deed!

It had been so with us, had we been there.

His liberty is full of threats to all--

To you yourself, to us, to everyone.

Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?

It will be laid to us, whose providence

Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt

This mad young man. But so much was our love,

We would not understand what was most fit,

But, like the owner of a foul disease,

To keep it from divulging, let it feed

Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?



QUEEN

To draw apart the body he hath killed,

O'er whom his very madness, like some ore

Among a mineral of metals base,

Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.



KING  O Gertrude, come away!

The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch

But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed

We must with all our majesty and skill

Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!



[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]



Friends both, go join you with some further aid.

Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,

And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.

Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body

Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.

[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends

And let them know both what we mean to do

And what's untimely done. ...

Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,

As level as the cannon to his blank

Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name

And hit the woundless air. O, come away!

My soul is full of discord and dismay.

[They exit.]



Scene 2

=======

[Enter Hamlet.]





HAMLET  Safely stowed.



GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!



HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?

O, here they come.



[Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]





ROSENCRANTZ

What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?



HAMLET

Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.



ROSENCRANTZ

Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence

And bear it to the chapel.



HAMLET  Do not believe it.



ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?



HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine

own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what

replication should be made by the son of a king?



ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?



HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,

his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the

King best service in the end. He keeps them like an

ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,

to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have

gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you

shall be dry again.



ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.



HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a

foolish ear.



ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the

body is and go with us to the King.



HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not

with the body. The King is a thing--



GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?



HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and

all after!

[They exit.]



Scene 3

=======

[Enter King and two or three.]





KING

I have sent to seek him and to find the body.

How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!

Yet must not we put the strong law on him.

He's loved of the distracted multitude,

Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;

And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,

But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,

This sudden sending him away must seem

Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown

By desperate appliance are relieved

Or not at all.



[Enter Rosencrantz.]



How now, what hath befallen?



ROSENCRANTZ

Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,

We cannot get from him.



KING  But where is he?



ROSENCRANTZ

Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.



KING

Bring him before us.



ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.



[They enter with Hamlet.]





KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?



HAMLET  At supper.



KING  At supper where?



HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A

certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at

him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We

fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves

for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is

but variable service--two dishes but to one table.

That's the end.



KING  Alas, alas!



HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat

of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that

worm.



KING  What dost thou mean by this?



HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a

progress through the guts of a beggar.



KING  Where is Polonius?



HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger

find him not there, seek him i' th' other

place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not

within this month, you shall nose him as you go up

the stairs into the lobby.



KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.



HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]



KING

Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety

(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve

For that which thou hast done) must send thee

hence

With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.

The bark is ready, and the wind at help,

Th' associates tend, and everything is bent

For England.



HAMLET  For England?



KING  Ay, Hamlet.



HAMLET  Good.



KING

So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.



HAMLET

I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for

England.

Farewell, dear mother.



KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.



HAMLET

My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,

Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--

Come, for England.	[He exits.]



KING

Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.

Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.

Away, for everything is sealed and done

That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.

[All but the King exit.]

And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught

(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,

Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red

After the Danish sword, and thy free awe

Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set

Our sovereign process, which imports at full,

By letters congruing to that effect,

The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,

For like the hectic in my blood he rages,

And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,

Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.

[He exits.]



Scene 4

=======

[Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]





FORTINBRAS

Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.

Tell him that by his license Fortinbras

Craves the conveyance of a promised march

Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.

If that his Majesty would aught with us,

We shall express our duty in his eye;

And let him know so.



CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.



FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]



[Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]





HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?



CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.



HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?



CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.



HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?



CAPTAIN

The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.



HAMLET

Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,

Or for some frontier?



CAPTAIN

Truly to speak, and with no addition,

We go to gain a little patch of ground

That hath in it no profit but the name.

To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;

Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole

A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.



HAMLET

Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.



CAPTAIN

Yes, it is already garrisoned.



HAMLET

Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats

Will not debate the question of this straw.

This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,

That inward breaks and shows no cause without

Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.



CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]



ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?



HAMLET

I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.

[All but Hamlet exit.]

How all occasions do inform against me

And spur my dull revenge. What is a man

If his chief good and market of his time

Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.

Sure He that made us with such large discourse,

Looking before and after, gave us not

That capability and godlike reason

To fust in us unused. Now whether it be

Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple

Of thinking too precisely on th' event

(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part

wisdom

And ever three parts coward), I do not know

Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"

Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means

To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:

Witness this army of such mass and charge,

Led by a delicate and tender prince,

Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed

Makes mouths at the invisible event,

Exposing what is mortal and unsure

To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,

Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great

Is not to stir without great argument,

But greatly to find quarrel in a straw

When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,

That have a father killed, a mother stained,

Excitements of my reason and my blood,

And let all sleep, while to my shame I see

The imminent death of twenty thousand men

That for a fantasy and trick of fame

Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot

Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,

Which is not tomb enough and continent

To hide the slain? O, from this time forth

My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!

[He exits.]



Scene 5

=======

[Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]





QUEEN  I will not speak with her.



GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,

Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.



QUEEN  What would she have?



GENTLEMAN

She speaks much of her father, says she hears

There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her

heart,

Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt

That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,

Yet the unshaped use of it doth move

The hearers to collection. They aim at it

And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;

Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield

them,

Indeed would make one think there might be

thought,

Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.



HORATIO

'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may

strew

Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.



QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]

[Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),

Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.

So full of artless jealousy is guilt,

It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.



[Enter Ophelia distracted.]





OPHELIA

Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?



QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?



OPHELIA [sings]

How should I your true love know

From another one?

By his cockle hat and staff

And his sandal shoon.



QUEEN

Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?



OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.

[Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,

He is dead and gone;

At his head a grass-green turf,

At his heels a stone.

Oh, ho!



QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--



OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.

[Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--



[Enter King.]





QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.



OPHELIA [sings]

Larded all with sweet flowers;

Which bewept to the ground did not go

With true-love showers.



KING  How do you, pretty lady?



OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a

baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but

know not what we may be. God be at your table.



KING  Conceit upon her father.



OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when

they ask you what it means, say you this:

[Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,

All in the morning betime,

And I a maid at your window,

To be your Valentine.

Then up he rose and donned his clothes

And dupped the chamber door,

Let in the maid, that out a maid

Never departed more.



KING  Pretty Ophelia--



OPHELIA

Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:

[Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,

Alack and fie for shame,

Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;

By Cock, they are to blame.

Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,

You promised me to wed."

He answers:

"So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,

An thou hadst not come to my bed."



KING  How long hath she been thus?



OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,

but I cannot choose but weep to think they would

lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of

it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,

my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet

ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]



KING

Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.

[Horatio exits.]

O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs

All from her father's death, and now behold!

O Gertrude, Gertrude,

When sorrows come, they come not single spies,

But in battalions: first, her father slain;

Next, your son gone, and he most violent author

Of his own just remove; the people muddied,

Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and

whispers

For good Polonius' death, and we have done but

greenly

In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia

Divided from herself and her fair judgment,

Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;

Last, and as much containing as all these,

Her brother is in secret come from France,

Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,

And wants not buzzers to infect his ear

With pestilent speeches of his father's death,

Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,

Will nothing stick our person to arraign

In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,

Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places

Gives me superfluous death.

[A noise within.]



QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?



KING  Attend!

Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.



[Enter a Messenger.]



What is the matter?



MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.

The ocean, overpeering of his list,

Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste

Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,

O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"

And, as the world were now but to begin,

Antiquity forgot, custom not known,

The ratifiers and props of every word,

They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"

Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,

"Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"

[A noise within.]



QUEEN

How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.

O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!



KING  The doors are broke.



[Enter Laertes with others.

]



LAERTES

Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.



ALL  No, let's come in!



LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.



ALL  We will, we will.



LAERTES

I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou

vile king,

Give me my father!



QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.



LAERTES

That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me

bastard,

Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot

Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow

Of my true mother.



KING  What is the cause, Laertes,

That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--

Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.

There's such divinity doth hedge a king

That treason can but peep to what it would,

Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,

Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,

Gertrude.--

Speak, man.



LAERTES  Where is my father?



KING  Dead.



QUEEN

But not by him.



KING  Let him demand his fill.



LAERTES

How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.

To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!

Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!

I dare damnation. To this point I stand,

That both the worlds I give to negligence,

Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged

Most throughly for my father.



KING  Who shall stay you?



LAERTES  My will, not all the world.

And for my means, I'll husband them so well

They shall go far with little.



KING  Good Laertes,

If you desire to know the certainty

Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge

That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and

foe,

Winner and loser?



LAERTES  None but his enemies.



KING  Will you know them, then?



LAERTES

To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms

And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,

Repast them with my blood.



KING  Why, now you speak

Like a good child and a true gentleman.

That I am guiltless of your father's death

And am most sensibly in grief for it,

It shall as level to your judgment 'pear

As day does to your eye.



[A noise within:] "Let her come in!"



LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?



[Enter Ophelia.]



O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt

Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!

By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight

Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,

Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!

O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits

Should be as mortal as an old man's life?

Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,

It sends some precious instance of itself

After the thing it loves.



OPHELIA [sings]

They bore him barefaced on the bier,

Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,

And in his grave rained many a tear.

Fare you well, my dove.



LAERTES

Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,

It could not move thus.



OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you

"Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes

it! It is the false steward that stole his master's

daughter.



LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.



OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.

Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,

that's for thoughts.



LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance

fitted.



OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.

There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we

may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear

your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would

give you some violets, but they withered all when

my father died. They say he made a good end.

[Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.



LAERTES

Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself

She turns to favor and to prettiness.



OPHELIA [sings]

And will he not come again?

And will he not come again?

No, no, he is dead.

Go to thy deathbed.

He never will come again.



His beard was as white as snow,

All flaxen was his poll.

He is gone, he is gone,

And we cast away moan.

God 'a mercy on his soul.

And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'

you.	[She exits.]



LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?



KING

Laertes, I must commune with your grief,

Or you deny me right. Go but apart,

Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,

And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.

If by direct or by collateral hand

They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,

Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,

To you in satisfaction; but if not,

Be you content to lend your patience to us,

And we shall jointly labor with your soul

To give it due content.



LAERTES  Let this be so.

His means of death, his obscure funeral

(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,

No noble rite nor formal ostentation)

Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,

That I must call 't in question.



KING  So you shall,

And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.

I pray you, go with me.

[They exit.]



Scene 6

=======

[Enter Horatio and others.]





HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?



GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have

letters for you.



HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not

know from what part of the world I should be

greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.



[Enter Sailors.]





SAILOR  God bless you, sir.



HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.



SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter

for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was

bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I

am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]



HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have

overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the

King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days

old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave

us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on

a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.

On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone

became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like

thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to

do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters

I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed

as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in

thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too

light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows

will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern

hold their course for England; of them I have

much to tell thee. Farewell.

He that thou knowest thine,

Hamlet.

Come, I will give you way for these your letters

And do 't the speedier that you may direct me

To him from whom you brought them.

[They exit.]



Scene 7

=======

[Enter King and Laertes.]





KING

Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,

And you must put me in your heart for friend,

Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,

That he which hath your noble father slain

Pursued my life.



LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me

Why you proceeded not against these feats,

So criminal and so capital in nature,

As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,

You mainly were stirred up.



KING  O, for two special reasons,

Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,

But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother

Lives almost by his looks, and for myself

(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),

She is so conjunctive to my life and soul

That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,

I could not but by her. The other motive

Why to a public count I might not go

Is the great love the general gender bear him,

Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,

Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,

Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,

Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,

Would have reverted to my bow again,

But not where I have aimed them.



LAERTES

And so have I a noble father lost,

A sister driven into desp'rate terms,

Whose worth, if praises may go back again,

Stood challenger on mount of all the age

For her perfections. But my revenge will come.



KING

Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think

That we are made of stuff so flat and dull

That we can let our beard be shook with danger

And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.

I loved your father, and we love ourself,

And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--



[Enter a Messenger with letters.]



How now? What news?



MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from

Hamlet.

These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.



KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?



MESSENGER

Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.

They were given me by Claudio. He received them

Of him that brought them.



KING  Laertes, you shall hear

them.--

Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]

[Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set

naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to

see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your

pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden

and more strange return. Hamlet.

What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?

Or is it some abuse and no such thing?



LAERTES  Know you the hand?



KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--

And in a postscript here, he says "alone."

Can you advise me?



LAERTES

I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.

It warms the very sickness in my heart

That I shall live and tell him to his teeth

"Thus didst thou."



KING  If it be so, Laertes

(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),

Will you be ruled by me?



LAERTES  Ay, my lord,

So you will not o'errule me to a peace.



KING

To thine own peace. If he be now returned,

As checking at his voyage, and that he means

No more to undertake it, I will work him

To an exploit, now ripe in my device,

Under the which he shall not choose but fall;

And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,

But even his mother shall uncharge the practice

And call it accident.



LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,

The rather if you could devise it so

That I might be the organ.



KING  It falls right.

You have been talked of since your travel much,

And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality

Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts

Did not together pluck such envy from him

As did that one, and that, in my regard,

Of the unworthiest siege.



LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?



KING

A very ribbon in the cap of youth--

Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes

The light and careless livery that it wears

Than settled age his sables and his weeds,

Importing health and graveness. Two months since

Here was a gentleman of Normandy.

I have seen myself, and served against, the French,

And they can well on horseback, but this gallant

Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,

And to such wondrous doing brought his horse

As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured

With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought

That I in forgery of shapes and tricks

Come short of what he did.



LAERTES  A Norman was 't?



KING  A Norman.



LAERTES

Upon my life, Lamord.



KING  The very same.



LAERTES

I know him well. He is the brooch indeed

And gem of all the nation.



KING  He made confession of you

And gave you such a masterly report

For art and exercise in your defense,

And for your rapier most especial,

That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed

If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their

nation

He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,

If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his

Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy

That he could nothing do but wish and beg

Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.

Now out of this--



LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?



KING

Laertes, was your father dear to you?

Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,

A face without a heart?



LAERTES  Why ask you this?



KING

Not that I think you did not love your father,

But that I know love is begun by time

And that I see, in passages of proof,

Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.

There lives within the very flame of love

A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,

And nothing is at a like goodness still;

For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,

Dies in his own too-much. That we would do

We should do when we would; for this "would"

changes

And hath abatements and delays as many

As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;

And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,

That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:

Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake

To show yourself indeed your father's son

More than in words?



LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.



KING

No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;

Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,

Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.

Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.

We'll put on those shall praise your excellence

And set a double varnish on the fame

The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,

together

And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,

Most generous, and free from all contriving,

Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,

Or with a little shuffling, you may choose

A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice

Requite him for your father.



LAERTES  I will do 't,

And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.

I bought an unction of a mountebank

So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,

Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,

Collected from all simples that have virtue

Under the moon, can save the thing from death

That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point

With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,

It may be death.



KING  Let's further think of this,

Weigh what convenience both of time and means

May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,

And that our drift look through our bad

performance,

'Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project

Should have a back or second that might hold

If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.

We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--

I ha 't!

When in your motion you are hot and dry

(As make your bouts more violent to that end)

And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared

him

A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,

If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,

Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what

noise?



[Enter Queen.]





QUEEN

One woe doth tread upon another's heel,

So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.



LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?



QUEEN

There is a willow grows askant the brook

That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.

Therewith fantastic garlands did she make

Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,

That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,

But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call

them.

There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds

Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,

When down her weedy trophies and herself

Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,

And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,

Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,

As one incapable of her own distress

Or like a creature native and endued

Unto that element. But long it could not be

Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,

Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay

To muddy death.



LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.



QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.



LAERTES

Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,

And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet

It is our trick; nature her custom holds,

Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,

The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.

I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,

But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]



KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.

How much I had to do to calm his rage!

Now fear I this will give it start again.

Therefore, let's follow.

[They exit.]





ACT 5

=====



Scene 1

=======

[Enter Gravedigger and Another.]





GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,

when she willfully seeks her own salvation?



OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave

straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it

Christian burial.



GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned

herself in her own defense?



OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.



GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be

else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself

wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three

branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she

drowned herself wittingly.



OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--



GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;

good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to

this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)

he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him

and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he

that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his

own life.



OTHER  But is this law?



GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.



OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been

a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'

Christian burial.



GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more

pity that great folk should have count'nance in this

world to drown or hang themselves more than

their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no

ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and

grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.



OTHER  Was he a gentleman?



GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.



OTHER  Why, he had none.



GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou

understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam

digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another

question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the

purpose, confess thyself--



OTHER  Go to!



GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than

either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?



OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a

thousand tenants.



GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The

gallows does well. But how does it well? It does

well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the

gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the

gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.



OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,

or a carpenter?"



GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.



OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.



GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.



OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.



[Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]





GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,

for your dull ass will not mend his pace with

beating. And, when you are asked this question

next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes

lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a

stoup of liquor.

[The Other Man exits

and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]

In youth when I did love, did love,

Methought it was very sweet

To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,

O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.



HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He

sings in grave-making.



HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of

easiness.



HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment

hath the daintier sense.



GRAVEDIGGER [sings]

But age with his stealing steps

Hath clawed me in his clutch,

And hath shipped me into the land,

As if I had never been such.

[He digs up a skull.]



HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing

once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if

'twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!

This might be the pate of a politician which this ass

now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,

might it not?



HORATIO  It might, my lord.



HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good

morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"

This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my

Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,

might it not?



HORATIO  Ay, my lord.



HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,

chapless and knocked about the mazard with a

sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had

the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the

breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine

ache to think on 't.



GRAVEDIGGER [sings]

A pickax and a spade, a spade,

For and a shrouding sheet,

O, a pit of clay for to be made

For such a guest is meet.

[He digs up more skulls.]



HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the

skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his

quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why

does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him

about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell

him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might

be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,

his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,

his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the

recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full

of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more

of his purchases, and double ones too, than the

length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very

conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,

and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?



HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.



HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?



HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.



HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out

assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--

Whose grave's this, sirrah?



GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.

[Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made

For such a guest is meet.



HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.



GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis

not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is

mine.



HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.

'Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou

liest.



GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again

from me to you.



HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?



GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.



HAMLET  What woman then?



GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.



HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?



GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest

her soul, she's dead.



HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by

the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the

Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of

it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the

peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he

galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been

grave-maker?



GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't

that day that our last King Hamlet overcame

Fortinbras.



HAMLET  How long is that since?



GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can

tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet

was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.



HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?



GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall

recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great

matter there.



HAMLET  Why?



GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There

the men are as mad as he.



HAMLET  How came he mad?



GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.



HAMLET  How "strangely"?



GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.



HAMLET  Upon what ground?



GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been

sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.



HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?



GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die

(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will

scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some

eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine

year.



HAMLET  Why he more than another?



GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his

trade that he will keep out water a great while; and

your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead

body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth

three-and-twenty years.



HAMLET  Whose was it?



GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.

Whose do you think it was?



HAMLET  Nay, I know not.



GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!

He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.

This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the

King's jester.



HAMLET  This?



GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.



HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor

Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite

jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his

back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in

my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung

those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.

Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your

songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to

set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your

own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my

lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch

thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh

at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.



HORATIO  What's that, my lord?



HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this

fashion i' th' earth?



HORATIO  E'en so.



HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]



HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.



HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!

Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of

Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?



HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider

so.



HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,

with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as

thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander

returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth

we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he

was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?

Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,

Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.

O, that that earth which kept the world in awe

Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!



[Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the

corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]



But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,

The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?

And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken

The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand

Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.

Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]



LAERTES  What ceremony else?



HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.



LAERTES  What ceremony else?



DOCTOR

Her obsequies have been as far enlarged

As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,

And, but that great command o'ersways the order,

She should in ground unsanctified been lodged

Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers

Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on

her.

Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,

Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home

Of bell and burial.



LAERTES

Must there no more be done?



DOCTOR  No more be done.

We should profane the service of the dead

To sing a requiem and such rest to her

As to peace-parted souls.



LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,

And from her fair and unpolluted flesh

May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,

A minist'ring angel shall my sister be

When thou liest howling.



HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?



QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!

[She scatters flowers.]

I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;

I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,

And not have strewed thy grave.



LAERTES  O, treble woe

Fall ten times treble on that cursed head

Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense

Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,

Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.

[Leaps in the grave.]

Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,

Till of this flat a mountain you have made

T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head

Of blue Olympus.



HAMLET, [advancing]

What is he whose grief

Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow

Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand

Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,

Hamlet the Dane.



LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]

The devil take thy soul!



HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]

I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,

For though I am not splenitive and rash,

Yet have I in me something dangerous,

Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.



KING  Pluck them asunder.



QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!



ALL  Gentlemen!



HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.

[Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]



HAMLET

Why, I will fight with him upon this theme

Until my eyelids will no longer wag!



QUEEN  O my son, what theme?



HAMLET

I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers

Could not with all their quantity of love

Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?



KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!



QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.



HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.

Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear

thyself,

Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?

I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?

To outface me with leaping in her grave?

Be buried quick with her, and so will I.

And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw

Millions of acres on us, till our ground,

Singeing his pate against the burning zone,

Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,

I'll rant as well as thou.



QUEEN  This is mere madness;

And thus awhile the fit will work on him.

Anon, as patient as the female dove

When that her golden couplets are disclosed,

His silence will sit drooping.



HAMLET  Hear you, sir,

What is the reason that you use me thus?

I loved you ever. But it is no matter.

Let Hercules himself do what he may,

The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.

[Hamlet exits.]



KING

I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.

[Horatio exits.]

[To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last

night's speech.

We'll put the matter to the present push.--

Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--

This grave shall have a living monument.

An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.

Till then in patience our proceeding be.

[They exit.]



Scene 2

=======

[Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]





HAMLET

So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.

You do remember all the circumstance?



HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!



HAMLET

Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting

That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay

Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--

And praised be rashness for it; let us know,

Our indiscretion sometime serves us well

When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn

us

There's a divinity that shapes our ends,

Rough-hew them how we will--



HORATIO  That is most

certain.



HAMLET  Up from my cabin,

My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark

Groped I to find out them; had my desire,

Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew

To mine own room again, making so bold

(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold

Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,

A royal knavery--an exact command,

Larded with many several sorts of reasons

Importing Denmark's health and England's too,

With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,

That on the supervise, no leisure bated,

No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,

My head should be struck off.



HORATIO  Is 't possible?



HAMLET

Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.

[Handing him a paper.]

But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?



HORATIO  I beseech you.



HAMLET

Being thus benetted round with villainies,

Or I could make a prologue to my brains,

They had begun the play. I sat me down,

Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--

I once did hold it, as our statists do,

A baseness to write fair, and labored much

How to forget that learning; but, sir, now

It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know

Th' effect of what I wrote?



HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.



HAMLET

An earnest conjuration from the King,

As England was his faithful tributary,

As love between them like the palm might flourish,

As peace should still her wheaten garland wear

And stand a comma 'tween their amities,

And many suchlike ases of great charge,

That, on the view and knowing of these contents,

Without debatement further, more or less,

He should those bearers put to sudden death,

Not shriving time allowed.



HORATIO  How was this sealed?



HAMLET

Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.

I had my father's signet in my purse,

Which was the model of that Danish seal;

Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,

Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it

safely,

The changeling never known. Now, the next day

Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent

Thou knowest already.



HORATIO

So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.



HAMLET

Why, man, they did make love to this employment.

They are not near my conscience. Their defeat

Does by their own insinuation grow.

'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes

Between the pass and fell incensed points

Of mighty opposites.



HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!



HAMLET

Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--

He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,

Popped in between th' election and my hopes,

Thrown out his angle for my proper life,

And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect

conscience

To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be

damned

To let this canker of our nature come

In further evil?



HORATIO

It must be shortly known to him from England

What is the issue of the business there.



HAMLET

It will be short. The interim's mine,

And a man's life's no more than to say "one."

But I am very sorry, good Horatio,

That to Laertes I forgot myself,

For by the image of my cause I see

The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.

But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me

Into a tow'ring passion.



HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?



[Enter Osric, a courtier.]





OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to

Denmark.



HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]

Dost know this waterfly?



HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.



HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,

for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much

land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his

crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,

but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.



OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I

should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.



HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of

spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the

head.



OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.



HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is

northerly.



OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.



HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for

my complexion.



OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as

'twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty

bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager

on your head. Sir, this is the matter--



HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to

Osric to put on his hat.]



OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.

Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe

me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent

differences, of very soft society and great showing.

Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or

calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the

continent of what part a gentleman would see.



HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in

you, though I know to divide him inventorially

would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but

yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the

verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great

article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness

as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his

mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,

nothing more.



OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.



HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the

gentleman in our more rawer breath?



OSRIC  Sir?



HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another

tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.



HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of

this gentleman?



OSRIC  Of Laertes?



HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words

are spent.



HAMLET  Of him, sir.



OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--



HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it

would not much approve me. Well, sir?



OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes

is--



HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare

with him in excellence. But to know a man well

were to know himself.



OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation

laid on him by them, in his meed he's

unfellowed.



HAMLET  What's his weapon?



OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.



HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--



OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary

horses, against the which he has impawned, as I

take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their

assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the

carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very

responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and

of very liberal conceit.



HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?



HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent

ere you had done.



OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.



HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the

matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I

would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six

Barbary horses against six French swords, their

assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--

that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this

all "impawned," as you call it?



OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen

passes between yourself and him, he shall not

exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for

nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your

Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.



HAMLET  How if I answer no?



OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person

in trial.



HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his

Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let

the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the

King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.

If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd

hits.



OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?



HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your

nature will.



OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.



HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend

it himself. There are no tongues else for 's

turn.



HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his

head.



HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he

sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same

breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got

the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of

encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries

them through and through the most fanned

and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to

their trial, the bubbles are out.



[Enter a Lord.]





LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by

young Osric, who brings back to him that you

attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your

pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will

take longer time.



HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow

the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is

ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as

now.



LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.



HAMLET  In happy time.



LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle

entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.



HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]



HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.



HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I

have been in continual practice. I shall win at the

odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here

about my heart. But it is no matter.



HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--



HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of

gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.



HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will

forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.



HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a

special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be

now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be

now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The

readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves

knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.



[A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers

with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,

foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]





KING

Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.

[He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]



HAMLET, [to Laertes]

Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;

But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence

knows,

And you must needs have heard, how I am punished

With a sore distraction. What I have done

That might your nature, honor, and exception

Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.

Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.

If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,

And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,

Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.

Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,

Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;

His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.

Sir, in this audience

Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil

Free me so far in your most generous thoughts

That I have shot my arrow o'er the house

And hurt my brother.



LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,

Whose motive in this case should stir me most

To my revenge; but in my terms of honor

I stand aloof and will no reconcilement

Till by some elder masters of known honor

I have a voice and precedent of peace

To keep my name ungored. But till that time

I do receive your offered love like love

And will not wrong it.



HAMLET  I embrace it freely

And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--

Give us the foils. Come on.



LAERTES  Come, one for me.



HAMLET

I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance

Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,

Stick fiery off indeed.



LAERTES  You mock me, sir.



HAMLET  No, by this hand.



KING

Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,

You know the wager?



HAMLET  Very well, my lord.

Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.



KING

I do not fear it; I have seen you both.

But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.



LAERTES

This is too heavy. Let me see another.



HAMLET

This likes me well. These foils have all a length?



OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.

[Prepare to play.]



KING

Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--

If Hamlet give the first or second hit

Or quit in answer of the third exchange,

Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.

The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,

And in the cup an union shall he throw,

Richer than that which four successive kings

In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,

And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,

The trumpet to the cannoneer without,

The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,

"Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.

And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.

[Trumpets the while.]



HAMLET  Come on, sir.



LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]



HAMLET  One.



LAERTES  No.



HAMLET  Judgment!



OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.



LAERTES  Well, again.



KING

Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.

Here's to thy health.

[He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]

[Drum, trumpets, and shot.]

Give him the cup.



HAMLET

I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.

Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?



LAERTES

A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.



KING

Our son shall win.



QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--

Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.

The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

[She lifts the cup.]



HAMLET  Good madam.



KING  Gertrude, do not drink.



QUEEN

I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]



KING, [aside]

It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.



HAMLET

I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.



QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.



LAERTES, [to Claudius]

My lord, I'll hit him now.



KING  I do not think 't.



LAERTES, [aside]

And yet it is almost against my conscience.



HAMLET

Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.

I pray you pass with your best violence.

I am afeard you make a wanton of me.



LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]



OSRIC  Nothing neither way.



LAERTES  Have at you now!

[Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change

rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]



KING  Part them. They are incensed.



HAMLET  Nay, come again.

[The Queen falls.]



OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!



HORATIO

They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?



OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?



LAERTES

Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.

[He falls.]

I am justly killed with mine own treachery.



HAMLET

How does the Queen?



KING  She swoons to see them bleed.



QUEEN

No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!

The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]



HAMLET

O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]

Treachery! Seek it out.



LAERTES

It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.

No med'cine in the world can do thee good.

In thee there is not half an hour's life.

The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,

Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice

Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,

Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.

I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.



HAMLET

The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy

work.	[Hurts the King.]



ALL  Treason, treason!



KING

O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.



HAMLET

Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,

Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?

[Forcing him to drink the poison.]

Follow my mother.	[King dies.]



LAERTES  He is justly served.

It is a poison tempered by himself.

Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.

Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,

Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]



HAMLET

Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--

I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--

You that look pale and tremble at this chance,

That are but mutes or audience to this act,

Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,

Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--

But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.

Thou livest; report me and my cause aright

To the unsatisfied.



HORATIO  Never believe it.

I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.

Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]



HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,

Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.

O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,

Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind

me!

If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,

Absent thee from felicity awhile

And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain

To tell my story.

[A march afar off and shot within.]

What warlike noise is this?



[Enter Osric.]





OSRIC

Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,

To th' ambassadors of England gives

This warlike volley.



HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!

The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.

I cannot live to hear the news from England.

But I do prophesy th' election lights

On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.

So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,

Which have solicited--the rest is silence.

O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]



HORATIO

Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,

And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.

[March within.]

Why does the drum come hither?



[Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with

Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]





FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?



HORATIO  What is it you would see?

If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.



FORTINBRAS

This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,

What feast is toward in thine eternal cell

That thou so many princes at a shot

So bloodily hast struck?



AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,

And our affairs from England come too late.

The ears are senseless that should give us hearing

To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,

That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.

Where should we have our thanks?



HORATIO  Not from his

mouth,

Had it th' ability of life to thank you.

He never gave commandment for their death.

But since, so jump upon this bloody question,

You from the Polack wars, and you from England,

Are here arrived, give order that these bodies

High on a stage be placed to the view,

And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world

How these things came about. So shall you hear

Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,

Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,

Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,

And, in this upshot, purposes mistook

Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I

Truly deliver.



FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it

And call the noblest to the audience.

For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.

I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,

Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.



HORATIO

Of that I shall have also cause to speak,

And from his mouth whose voice will draw on

more.

But let this same be presently performed

Even while men's minds are wild, lest more

mischance

On plots and errors happen.



FORTINBRAS  Let four captains

Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,

For he was likely, had he been put on,

To have proved most royal; and for his passage,

The soldier's music and the rite of war

Speak loudly for him.

Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this

Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.

Go, bid the soldiers shoot.

[They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of

ordnance are shot off.]

=================================
	ORIGINAL TEXT  ENDS HERE
=================================


